# Part I: How to Deploy Controversies About the Social World

_Source pages: 30–37_

Like all sciences, sociology begins in wonder. The commotion might be registered in many different ways but it’s always the paradoxical presence of something at once invisible yet tangible, taken for granted yet surprising, mundane but of baffling subtlety that triggers a passionate attempt to tame the wild beast of the social. ‘We live in groups that seem firmly entrenched, and yet how is it that they transform so rapidly?’ ‘We are made to do things by other agencies over which we have no control and that seem plain and mundane enough.’ ‘There is something invisible that weighs on all of us that is more solid than steel and yet so incredibly labile.’ ‘There exist forces that are strangely similar to those studied by natural scientists and yet distinctively different.’ ‘This puzzling mixture of obdurate resistance and perverse complexity seems wide opened to inquiry, and yet it defies all inquiries.’ It would be hard to find a social scientist not shaken by one or more of these bewildering statements. Are not these conundrums the source of our libido sciendi? What pushes us to devote so much energy into unraveling them?

There is, however, an increasing distance between what triggers those successive shocks and the solutions that have been devised to explain them. I am going to argue in Part I that although the insights of sociology are correct, the solutions suggested by a shrinking definition of the social has in many ways adulterated what was productive and scientific in them. This is why I want to reexamine each of those successive questions and dissect them so that we can renew our definition of what is an association.

Faithful to relativist principles, instead of dividing the social domain as most textbooks of sociology usually do into a list of actors, methods, and domains already taken as members of the social realm, I have organized the first part of this work by types of controversies about what this universe is made of. I think it is possible to build upon the major intuitions of the social sciences by examining five major uncertainties:[^16]

- the nature of groups: there exist many contradictory ways for actors to be given an identity;

- the nature of actions: in each course of action a great variety of agents seem to barge in and displace the original goals;

- the nature of objects: the type of agencies participating in interaction seems to remain wide open;

- the nature of facts: the links of natural sciences with the rest of society seems to be the source of continuous disputes;

- and, finally, about the type of studies done under the label of a science of the social as it is never clear in which precise sense social sciences can be said to be empirical.

What has made ANT so implausible is that before going anywhere those five uncertainties have to be piled on top of one another, with each new one making the former even more puzzling until some common sense is regained—but only at the end. Most users of ANT have so far had little patience to wait and I can’t blame them.[^17]

The reader will discover here a set of complicated instructions to make displacement more costly and more painful. The reason for this is that I want to break the habit of linking the notions of ‘society’, ‘social factor’, and ‘social explanation’ with a sudden acceleration in the description. When sociologists of the social pronounce the words ‘society’, ‘power’, ‘structure’, and ‘context’, they often jump straight ahead to connect vast arrays of life and history, to mobilize gigantic forces, to detect dramatic patterns emerging out of confusing interactions, to see everywhere in the cases at hand yet more examples of well-known types, to reveal behind the scenes some dark powers pulling the strings. Not that they are wrong since its perfectly true that older social relations have been packaged in such a way as to seem to provide a ready explanation for many puzzling subjects. But the time has come to have a much closer look at the type of aggregates thus assembled and at the ways they are connected to one another.

When you wish to discover the new unexpected actors that have more recently popped up and which are not yet bona fide members of ‘society’, you have to travel somewhere else and with very different kinds of gear. As we are going to see, there is as much difference in the two uses of the word ‘social’ as there is between learning how to drive on an already existing freeway and exploring for the first time the bumpy territory in which a road has been planned against the wishes of many local communities.[^18] There’s no question that ANT prefers to travel slowly, on small roads, on foot, and by paying the full cost of any displacement out of its own pocket.

The reason for this change of tempo is that, instead of taking a reasonable position and imposing some order beforehand, ANT claims to be able to find order much better after having let the actors deploy the full range of controversies in which they are immersed. It is as if we were saying to the actors: ‘We won’t try to discipline you, to make you fit into our categories; we will let you deploy your own worlds, and only later will we ask you to explain how you came about settling them.’ The task of defining and ordering the social should be left to the actors themselves, not taken up by the analyst. This is why, to regain some sense of order, the best solution is to trace connections between the controversies themselves rather than try to decide how to settle any given controversy.[^19] The search for order, rigor, and pattern is by no means abandoned. It is simply relocated one step further into abstraction so that actors are allowed to unfold their own differing cosmos, no matter how counter-intuitive they appear.[^20]

It is this increased level of abstraction in social theory which makes ANT hard to grasp at first. And yet this shift is comparable to what a cartographer does in trying to record the shape of a foreign coast on a piece of paper. She might exert herself to fit the various reports sent by explorers into some existing geometrical format—bays have to be circles, capes triangles, continents squares. But after noticing the hopeless mess created by those records, none of which exactly fall into pre-determined shapes, she will eagerly accept any proposition to displace the quest for geometrical rigor with a totally abstract Cartesian grid. Then she will use this empty grid to patiently record the coastline itself, allowing it to be drawn in as tortuous a way as geological history made it to be. Although it may appear stupid to record every reported point simply by longitude and latitude, it would be even more stupid to insist that only data that fits a preordained geometrical shape be kept. Similarly, ANT claims that it is possible to trace more sturdy relations and discover more revealing patterns by finding a way to register the links between unstable and shifting frames of reference rather than by trying to keep one frame stable. Society is no more ‘roughly’ made of ‘individuals’, of ‘cultures’, of ‘nation states’ than Africa is ‘roughly’ a circle, France a hexagon or Cornwall a triangle. There is nothing surprising in this since every scientific discipline is a slow training in devising the right sort of relativism that can be adapted to the data at hand. Why would sociology alone be forbidden to invent its own path and be requested to stick to the obvious? Now that geologists have accepted the notion of cold and rigid continental plates floating freely over the hot, molten seabed that seeps out of deep oceanic rifts, are they not, so to speak, on ‘firmer ground’? Similarly, ANT claims that we will find a much more scientific way of building the social world if we abstain from interrupting the flood of controversies. We, too, should find our firm ground: on shifting sands. Contrary to what is so often said, relativism is a way to float on data, not drown in them.

Metaphors borrowed from cartography or from physics break down very fast, however, once the range of uncertainties to be swallowed by sociologists of association begins to be deployed. In some extreme situations, actors seem to have an uncanny ability to disagree with everything sociologists supposedly take for granted in order to begin their work. Abandoning the fixed frame of reference offered by ether, as physicists did, appears in retrospect a rather simple affair when compared with what we will have to let go of if we want to leave the actors free to deploy the full incommensurability of their own worldmaking activities.[^21] Be prepared to cast off agency, structure, psyche, time, and space along with every other philosophical and anthropological category, no matter how deeply rooted in common sense they may appear to be.

Using the example of our cartographer, it is as if she had to deal not only with multiple reports coming from many travelers but also with multiple projection grids, where each point is requesting its own ad hoc coordinates. Faced with this confusion, one may decide to restrain the range of controversies or to unleash all of them. The first pre-relativist solution works fine but risks limiting sociology to routine, cold, and quiet situations. The second relativist solution tackles active, warm, and extreme situations, but then one has to let controversies unfold all the way. Striking some compromise between the two positions would be most absurd since controversies are not simply a nuisance to be kept at bay, but what allows the social to be established and the various social sciences to contribute in its building. Many of the difficulties in developing those disciplines have come from a refusal to be theoretical enough and from a misplaced attempt at clinging to common sense mixed with an ill-timed craving for political relevance. Such is the extreme position I wish to try and sustain for as long as possible. The drawback is that throughout their travels readers have to support themselves on a strange diet: they have to feed off controversies about what the social is made out of.

Traveling with ANT, I am afraid to say, will turn out to be agonizingly slow. Movements will be constantly interrupted, interfered with, disrupted, and dislocated by the five types of uncertainties. In the world ANT is trying to travel through, no displacement seems possible without costly and painful translations. Sociologists of the social seem to glide like angels, transporting power and connections almost immaterially, while the ANT-scholar has to trudge like an ant, carrying the heavy gear in order to generate even the tiniest connection. At the end of this book, we will attempt to summarize what differentiates a good ANT account from a bad one—a crucial quality test—by asking three questions: have all the difficulties of traveling been recognized? Has the complete cost of the travel from one connection to the next been fully paid? Has the traveler not cheated by surreptitiously getting a ride from an already existing ‘social order’? In the meantime, my advice is to pack as little as possible, don’t forget to pay your ticket, and prepare for delays.

---

[^16]: I have chosen ‘uncertainties’—in a weak allusion to the ‘uncertainty principle’— because it remains impossible to decide whether it resides in the observer or in the phenomenon observed. As we will see, it’s never the case that the analyst knows what the actors ignore, nor is it the case that the actors know what the observer ignores. This is the reason why the social needs to be reassembled.

[^17]: For readers most interested in science studies, it might make more sense to read Chapter 4 first—p. 87—and then swallow the other sources of uncertainty one by one. For those more familiar with ANT, it might be easier to start with the interlude, p. 141.

[^18]: A reader, asking in what sense our theory of the social could be reconciled with ‘conventional’ sociology, offered as an objection the way AIDS patients mobilized as a group. Looking at traditional ‘social movements’, it was obvious to her that patients’ organizations corresponded to ‘conventional’ definitions of the social because she had entirely forgotten how deeply innovative it was for patients to make politics out of retroviruses. For us on the other hand, AIDS activism, and more generally patient-based organizations, is just the type of innovation that requires completely new definitions of the social. See Steven Epstein (1996), Impure Science. Aids, Activism and the Politics of Knowledge; Michel Callon and Vololona Rabeharisoa (1999), Le pouvoir des malades; and Nicolas Dodier (2003), Lec¸ons politiques de l’e´pide´mie de sida. These prove how fast people forgetthenewassociationsandincludethemintheir‘conventional’definitionofwhatisa society.

[^19]: A striking example of the richness of this approach has been provided in Boltanski and The´venot, On Justification. In this major work, the authors have shown that it was possible to find a much more solid order once it was accepted that ordinary French persons, when engaged in polemics where they had to justify their positions, could rely not on one but six complete principles of justification (les Cite´s or Orders of Worth: Market, Industrial, Civic, Domestic, Inspired, Opinion) to which the authors later added a possible Green justification. See Claudette Lafaye and Laurent Thevenot (1993), ‘Une justification e´cologique? Conflits dans l’ame´nagement de la nature’. Although those principles were incommensurable, the sociologists, by moving one step further into abstraction, could nonetheless render them comparable. It’s this magnificent example of the power of relativity that I am trying to emulate here.

[^20]: It’s only in Part II that we will deal with the other question of stabilizing controversies. For reasons that will become clear only later, sociologists of the social have not been able to keep the two movements distinct.

[^21]: ‘World-making’ would be a fine word, see Nelson Goodman (1988), Ways of World Making, were it not for the conception of ‘making’ that goes with it and the definition of

    the ‘one world’. This expression is thus taken as a provisional placeholder until we can redefine constructivism—see p. 88—and then much later what it means to compose ‘one common world’—p. 247.
