# First Source of Uncertainty: No Group, Only Group Formation

_Source pages: 38–53_

Where should we start? As always, it is best to begin in the middle of things, in medias res. Will the reading of a newspaper do? Sure, it offers a starting point as good as any. As soon as you open it, it’s like a rain, a flood, an epidemic, an infestation. With every two lines, a trace is being left by some writer that some group is being made or unmade. Here it’s the CEO of a big company who deplores the fact that five years after the merger the firm’s various branches are still not fully integrated. She wonders how to ‘promote a common corporate culture’. A few lines further down finds an anthropologist explaining that there is no ‘ethnic’ difference between Hutus and Tutsis in Rwanda, but that it’s really a ‘class difference’ that has been ‘instrumentalized’ by colonialists and then ‘naturalized’ as a ‘cultural’ one. In the letters section, a Scot reminds his readers of the ‘Glorious Alliance’ between France and Mary Queen of Scots, which explains why Scotland should not share the rabid Europhobia of Englishmen. A correspondent from France tries to explain why second generation girls from Algeria that show up at school with an Islamic veil are seen by their teachers as ‘fanatics’ who ‘exclude themselves’ from the French Republic. In the Europe section, it is explained that EU functionaries are more and more thinking ‘as Europeans’ and are no longer ‘loyal to their nationalities’. In the Music section, a fierce dispute divides Baroque ensembles according to the frequency of their tuning forks, pelting one another with accusations such as ‘modernist’, ‘unfaithful to the tradition’, ‘academic’. In the Computer section, the writer mocks the attachment of Macintosh users to their utterly marginal machines and puts forward a ‘cultural interpretation’ for what he calls a form of ‘techno-fanaticism’. Further down an editorialist predicts that Iraq, though its borders are fairly recent, will exist as a nation and will not split up along the older dividing lines of religion and historical ‘zones of influence’. Another column mocks the accusation that those against the war in Iraq are ‘anti-American’. It never stops.

Relating to one group or another is an on-going process made up of uncertain, fragile, controversial, and ever-shifting ties. Is this not odd? If we simply follow the newspapers’ cues, the central intuition of sociology should be that at any given moment actors are made to fit in a group—often in more than one. And yet, when you read social theorists, it seems that the main, the crucial, the most urgent question should be which grouping is preferable to start a social enquiry. Should we take social aggregates to be made of ‘individuals’, ‘of organizations’, ‘of ‘classes’, of ‘roles’, of ‘life trajectories’, of ‘discursive fields’, of ‘selfish genes’, of ‘forms of life’, of ‘social networks’? They never seem to tire in designating one entity as real, solid, proven, or entrenched while others are criticized as being artificial, imaginary, transitional, illusory, abstract, impersonal, or meaningless. Should we focus on the micro-level of interactions or should we consider the macro-level as more relevant? Is it better to view markets, organizations, or networks as the essential ingredients of our collective life?

While the most common experience we have of the social world is of being simultaneously seized by several possible and contradictory calls for regroupings, it seems that the most important decision to make before becoming a social scientist is to decide first which ingredients are already there in society. While it is fairly obvious that we are enrolled in a group by a series of interventions that renders visible those who argue for the relevance of one grouping and the irrelevance of others, everything happens as if social scientists had to claim that there exists ‘out there’ one type that is real, whereas the other sets are really inauthentic, obsolete, irrelevant, or artificial. While we are well aware that the first feature of the social world is this constant tracing of boundaries by people over some other people, sociologists of the social consider that the main feature of this world is to recognize, independently of who is tracing them and with what sort of tools, the unquestionable existence of boundaries. Even stranger is that while social scientists, economists, historians, psychologists, and political scientists are at work with their newspaper columns, demonstrations, teachings, reports, enquiries, commissions, and statistics to help define and redefine groups, social theories still seem as if the existence of the relevant actors was fully independent of this massive amount of work by the professionals, or worse, as if this inevitable reflexive loop precluded sociology from ever becoming a science. And yet, who would know how to invoke the ‘unconscious’ without Freud? Who would be able to denounce ‘alienation’ without Marx? Who would be able to declare themselves ‘upper-middle class’ without social statistics? Who would learn to ‘feel European’ without the editorials of the liberal press?

To sum up, whereas for sociologists the first problem seems to settle on one privileged grouping, our most common experience, if we are faithful to it, tells us that there are lots of contradictory group formations, group enrollment—activity to which social scientists are obviously crucial contributors. The choice is thus clear: either we follow social theorists and begin our travel by setting up at the start which kind of group and level of analysis we will focus on, or we follow the actors’ own ways and begin our travels by the traces left behind by their activity of forming and dismantling groups.

The first source of uncertainty one should learn from is that there is no relevant group that can be said to make up social aggregates, no established component that can be used as an incontrovertible starting point.[^22] Many a sociological enquiry has begun by setting up one—or several—type of groupings, before apologizing profusely for this somewhat arbitrary limitation made necessary, it is often argued, by the ‘obligation to limit one’s scope’ or ‘by the right of a scientist to define one’s object’. But this is not at all the sort of setting, the sort of obligation, the sort of apologies, sociologists of associations wish to start with. Their duty is not to stabilize—whether at the beginning for clarity, for convenience, or to look reasonable—the list of groupings making up the social. Quite the opposite: their starting point begins precisely with the controversies about which grouping one pertains to, including of course the controversies among social scientists about what the social world is made of.

If someone pointed out to me that words like ‘group’, ‘grouping’, and ‘actor’ are meaningless, I would answer: ‘Quite right.’ The word ‘group’ is so empty that it sets neither the size nor the content. It could be applied to a planet as well as to an individual; to Microsoft as well as to my family; to plants as well as to baboons. This is exactly why I have chosen it.

This is a larger point about the vocabulary of ANT with which I should familiarize the reader at this early stage in order to avoid confusing the language of this book with the landscape we are going to visit. I find it best to use the most general, the most banal, even the most vulgar repertoire so that there will be no risk of confusing the actors’ own prolific idioms. Sociologists of the social, as a rule, do just the opposite. They are keen to produce precise, well chosen, sophisticated terms for what they say the actors say. But then they might run the risk of confusing the two meta-languages—since actors, too, have their own elaborate and fully reflexive meta-language. If they practice critical sociology, then there is an even greater risk to render actors mute altogether. ANT prefers to use what could be called an infralanguage, which remains strictly meaningless except for allowing displacement from one frame of reference to the next. In my experience, this is a better way for the vocabulary of the actors to be heard loud and clear—and I am not especially worried if it is the social scientists’ jargon that is being downplayed. If I had to provide a checklist for what is a good ANT account—this will be an important indicator of quality—are the concepts of the actors allowed to be stronger than that of the analysts, or is it the analyst who is doing all the talking? As far as writing reports is concerned, it means a precise but difficult trial: Is the text that comments on the various quotes and documents more, less, or as interesting as the actors’ own expressions and behaviors? If you find this test too easy to meet, then ANT is not for you.

A list of traces left by the formation of groups

From the many disputes among social theorists and among actors themselves about what should be the basic building block of society, there is no reason to draw the conclusion that we should despair of social science. ANT doesn’t claim that we will ever know if society is ‘really’ made of small individual calculative agents or of huge macroactors; nor does it claim that since anything goes one can pick a favorite candidate at whim. On the contrary, it draws the relativist, that is, the scientific conclusion that those controversies provide the analyst with an essential resource to render the social connections traceable. ANT simply claims that once we are accustomed to these many shifting frames of reference a very good grasp of how the social is generated can be provided, since a relativist connection between frames of reference offers a better source of objective judgment than the absolute (that is, arbitrary) settings suggested by common sense. This is the reason why it is so crucial not to begin with a pronouncement of the sort: ‘Social aggregates are mainly made of (x).’ It makes no difference if (x) stands for ‘individual agent’, ‘organizations’, ‘races’, ‘small bands’, ‘states’, ‘persons’, ‘members’, ‘will power’, ‘libido’, ‘biographies’, ‘fields’, etc. ANT simply doesn’t take as its job to stabilize the social on behalf of the people it studies; such a duty is to be left entirely to the ‘actors themselves’—a much maligned cliche´ which we will visit in due time.

While at first sight it would seem easier for sociologists to settle on one group instead of mapping the controversies about group formation, it is exactly the opposite and for a good empirical reason. Group formations leave many more traces in their wake than already established connections which, by definition, might remain mute and invisible. If a given ensemble simply lies there, then it is invisible and nothing can be said about it. The ensemble generates no trace and thus produces no information whatsoever; if it is visible, then it is being performed and will then generate new and interesting data. The solution is to substitute the list of groupings composed of social aggregates—an impossible task—with the list of the elements always present in controversies about groups—a much simpler one. This second list is more abstract to be sure since it deals with the work necessary to delineate any grouping, but it also generates much more data since every time a new grouping is alluded to the fabrication mechanism necessary to keep it alive will be made visible and thus traceable. While, after one hundred and fifty years, sociologists are still unclear on what the ‘right’ social aggregates should be,[^23] it is a rather simpler matter to agree that in any controversy about group formation—including of course academic disputes—some items will always be present: groups are made to talk; anti-groups are mapped; new resources are fetched so as to make their boundaries more durable; and professionals with their highly specialized paraphernalia are mobilized.

First, to delineate a group, no matter if it has to be created from scratch or simply refreshed, you have to have spokespersons which ‘speak for’ the group existence—and sometimes are very talkative, as the newspaper example made clear. Whichever example you take, be they feminist dog-owners in California, Kosovars in former Serbia, ‘chevaliers du tastevin’ in my native Burgundy, Achuars in the Amazon, accountants, anti-globalists, sociologists of science, egos, Trotskyites, working class, market forces, conspiracies, etc., all need some people defining who they are, what they should be, what they have been. These are constantly at work, justifying the group’s existence, invoking rules and precedents and, as we shall see, measuring up one definition against all the others. Groups are not silent things, but rather the provisional product of a constant uproar made by the millions of contradictory voices about what is a group and who pertains to what. Just think of the mass of talks and writings that went into the delineation of this extraordinary set: homo oeconomicus.[^24]

There is no group without some kind of recruiting officer. No flock of sheep without a shepherd—and his dog, his walking stick, his piles of vaccination certificates, his mountain of paperwork to get EU subsidies. If you still believe groupings exist ‘by themselves’, for instance the ‘individual’, just try to remember how much labor had to be done before each of you could ‘take your life into your own hands’. How many admonitions from parents, teachers, bosses, partners, and colleagues before we learned that we had better be a group of our own (the ego)? And how quickly we forgot that lesson.[^25] Although groups seem to be already fully equipped, ANT sees none existing without a rather large retinue of group makers, group talkers, and group holders.

Second, whenever some work has to be done to trace or retrace the boundary of a group, other groupings are designated as being empty, archaic, dangerous, obsolete, and so on. It is always by comparison with other competing ties that any tie is emphasized. So for every group to be defined, a list of anti-groups is set up as well. This is quite convenient for observers because it means that actors are always engaged in the business of mapping the ‘social context’ in which they are placed, thus offering the analyst a full-blooded theory of what sort of sociology they should be treated with.[^26] This is why it is so important not to define in advance what sort of social aggregates could provide the context for all these maps. Group delineation is not only one of the occupations of social scientists, but also the very constant task of the actors themselves. Actors do the sociology for the sociologists and sociologists learn from the actors what makes up their set of associations.

While this should seem obvious, such a result is actually in opposition to the basic wisdom of critical sociologists. For them, actors do not see the whole picture but remain only ‘informants’. This is why they have to be taught what is the context ‘in which’ they are situated and ‘of which’ they see only a tiny part, while the social scientist, floating above, sees the ‘whole thing’. The excuse for occupying such a bird’s eye view is usually that scientists are doing ‘reflexively’ what the informants are doing ‘unwittingly’. But even this is doubtful. The little awareness that social scientists may gather is exacted out of the reflexive group formation of those they simply, at this point of their enquiry, use like a parasite. In general, what passes for reflexivity in most social sciences is the sheer irrelevancy of questions raised by the analyst about some actors’ serious concerns.[^27] As a rule, it’s much better to set up as the default position that the inquirer is always one reflexive loop behind those they study.

Third, when groups are formed or redistributed, their spokesperson looks rather frantically for ways to de-fine them. Their boundaries are marked, delineated, and rendered fixed and durable. Every group, no matter how small or how big, requires a limes like the mythical one traced by Romulus around nascent Rome. This is very convenient for the analyst as every group formation will be accompanied by the digging out of a wide range of features, mobilized to make the group boundary hold against the contradictory pressures of all the competing anti-groups that threaten to dissolve it. There exist endless ways of rendering the group definition a finite and sure thing, so finite and sure that, in the end, it looks like the object of an unproblematic definition. You may appeal to tradition or to law. You may invent strange hybrids like ‘strategic essentialism’ or entrench the boundary in ‘nature’. You may even turn it into a ‘genetic make-up’, associate it with ‘blood and soil’, make it a ‘folk tradition’, sink it into customs or habits. On the contrary, you may tie it to freedom, emancipation, artifice, fashion, or history. In the end it will have become so unquestionable that it will be taken for granted and thus will no longer produce any trace, spark, or information. The ensemble is now entirely out of the social world—in the ANT sense—even though it is now, in the usual sense, a bona fide member of the social.

Fourth, among the many spokespersons that make possible the durable definition of groups, one must include social scientists, social sciences, social statistics, and social journalism. This is one of the essential differences between the two schools of thought. For the sociologists of the social, sociology should strive to become a science in the traditional disinterested sense of a gaze directed to a world outside, allowing for a description that is somewhat independent of the groups being materialized by the actors. For the sociologists of associations, any study of any group by any social scientist is part and parcel of what makes the group exist, last, decay, or disappear. In the developed world, there is no group that does not have at least some social science instrument attached to it. This is not some ‘inherent limitation’ of the discipline due to the fact that sociologists are also ‘social members’ and have difficulties in ‘extracting themselves’ out of the bonds of their own ‘social categories’. It is simply because they are on par with those they study, doing exactly the same job and participating in the same tasks of tracing social bonds, albeit with different instruments and for different professional callings. Although in the first school actors and scholars are in two different boats, in the second they remain in the same boat all along and play the same role, namely group formation. If the social is to be assembled, every hand is needed. We will draw only at the end the consequence of this fundamental equality.

No matter how gross and tentative my list appears, it is already possible to learn how to trace with it many social connections, instead of being constantly bogged down in the impossible task of deciding once and for all what is the right unit of analysis sociology should chose to focus on. This is, however, a very partial advantage of ANT. On the one hand, we are freed from one impossible task that would have slowed us down. On the other, we now have to take into account many more contradictory cartographies of the social than we would have wished for—and that is going to slow us down even more.

No work, no group

The choice, as we just saw, is not between certainty and confusion, between the arbitrariness of some a priori decision and the morass of endless differences. What we have lost—a fixed list of groups—we have regained because groupings have constantly to be made, or remade, and during this creation or recreation the group-makers leave behind many traces that can be used as data by the informer. One way to mark this difference is to say that social aggregates are not the object of an ostensive definition—like mugs and cats and chairs that can be pointed at by the index finger—but only of a performative definition. They are made by the various ways and manners in which they are said to exist. This distinction, however, entails many delicate linguistic and metaphysical difficulties. I don’t want to suggest that groups are made by fiat or, worse still, out of speech acts by mere conventions.[^28] I want to use it simply to underline the difference between groups endowed with some inertia and groupings that need to be constantly kept up by some group-making effort. Sociologists of the social like to appeal to ‘social inertia’, as if there existed somewhere a stock of connections whose capital could be eroded only over a long time. For ANT, if you stop making and remaking groups, you stop having groups. No reservoir of forces flowing from ‘social forces’ will help you. For sociologists of the social, the rule is order while decay, change, or creation are the exceptions. For the sociologists of associations, the rule is performance and what has to be explained, the troubling exceptions, are any type of stability over the long term and on a larger scale. It is as if, in the two schools, background and foreground were reversed.

The consequences of this inversion are enormous. If inertia, durability, range, solidity, commitment, loyalty, adhesion, etc. have to be accounted for, this cannot be done without looking for vehicles, tools, instruments, and materials able to provide such a stability—see the third and fourth uncertainties. Whereas, for the sociologists of the social, the great virtue of appeals to society is that they offer this long lasting stability on a plate and for free, our school views stability as exactly what has to be explained by appealing to costly and demanding means. And by definition those instruments should have another quality than that of being ‘social’, since they have to make the grouping reach a bit further and stand a bit longer. The problem with any ostensive definition of the social is that no extra effort seems necessary to maintain the groups in existence, while the influence of the analyst seems to count for nothing—or simply as a perturbing factor that should be minimized as much as possible. The great benefit of a performative definition, on the other hand, is just the opposite: it draws attention to the means necessary to ceaselessly upkeep the groups and to the key contributions made by the analysts’ own resources. Sociology of associations has to pay the price, in small change, of what sociology of the social seems to stock on its shelves in infinite supply.

In pointing out the practical means necessary to delineate groups and keep them in existence, we encounter a conflict of duties that marks a clear departure point—not the last!—between the freeways of the sociologists of the social and the delicate trails of the regions we wish to map. It all depends on what is designed by ‘means’. While the first enquirers exclaim: ‘Surely we need to start somewhere, so why not begin by defining society as being made of (x)?’ The others exclaim with as much energy: ‘Let the actors do the job for us. Don’t define for them what makes up the social!’ The reason for this difference in duties is that, in the eyes of the former group, the choice of a departure point is not absolutely crucial since the social world already exists. For them, if you highlight ‘classes’ instead of ‘individuals’, ‘nations’ instead of ‘classes’, ‘life trajectories’ instead of ‘social roles’, or ‘social networks’ instead of ‘organizations’, all the paths will merge in the end since they are simply somewhat arbitrary ways to delineate the same big animal—in the same fashion as for the proverbial elephant seized successively by the leg, the ear, the trunk, or the tusk. However, the situation is entirely different for ANT because neither society nor the social exists in the first place. They have to be retraced by subtle changes in connecting non-social resources. Thus, every choice of a departure point will lead to the drawing of a completely different animal, fully incommensurable with the others. For the first school, society is always there putting its full weight behind whatever vehicle can carry it; in the second approach, social links have to be traced by the circulation of different vehicles which cannot be substituted by one another.

For example, if an informant says that she lives ‘in a God ordained world’, this statement is not really different from that of another informant who claims he is ‘dominated by market forces’, since both of these terms—‘God’ and ‘market’—are mere ‘expressions’ of the same social world. But it makes a huge, an insurmountable, an incommensurable difference for the ANT-trained sociologist. An association with God is not substitutable by any other association, it is utterly specific and cannot be reconciled with another one made up of market forces which, in turn, designs a pattern completely different from those drawn by legal ties. Sociologists of the social always have at their disposal a stable and absolute third term in which to translate all the vocabularies of the informants, a master vocabulary which acts as a sort of clearing house for instantaneous exchanges between goods that all share the same basic homogeneous quality—namely, to be social. ANT-sociologists, on the other hand, possess no such common currency. The word social cannot replace anything, cannot express anything better, cannot be substituted—in any form or guise—for anything else. It is not the common measure of all things, like a credit card widely accepted everywhere. It is only a movement that can be seized indirectly when there is a slight change in one older association mutating into a slightly newer or different one. Far from a stable and sure thing, it is no more than an occasional spark generated by the shift, the shock, the slight displacement of other non-social phenomena. Does this mean that we have to take seriously the real and sometimes exquisitely small differences between the many ways in which people ‘achieve the social’? I am afraid so.

Mediators vs. intermediaries

It would be possible to attenuate the differences between the two schools by saying that ‘naturally’ all social scientists agree that groups have to be made and remade anew through some other non-social means, and that there is never a grouping that can sustain its existence without some keeping up. To be sure, everyone will agree that, for instance, popular festivals are necessary to ‘refresh social ties’; that propaganda is indispensable to ‘heat up’ the passions of ‘national identities’; that traditions are ‘invented’; that it is good for a company to distribute a journal to ‘build loyalties’; that without price tags and bar codes it would be very difficult to ‘calculate’ a price; that for a child to become ‘responsible’ early spanking cannot do any harm; that without a totem it would be difficult for a tribe to recognize that they are ‘members’ of the same clan. These sorts of expressions flow effortlessly from our keyboards. But their precise effect depends on how exactly we understand ways of speaking which all allude to the ‘making’ of groups. For sociologists of the social, such terms designate the many avatars that the same social order can take or the variegated tools with which it ‘represents’ itself or through which it is ‘reproduced’.[^29] For them, ‘social forces’ are always already present in the background so that the precise means to achieve their presence matters a great deal—but not that crucially.

For the sociologists of associations, they make all the difference in the world because there exists no society to begin with, no reservoir of ties, no big reassuring pot of glue to keep all those groups together. If you don’t have the festival now or print the newspaper today, you simply lose the grouping, which is not a building in need of restoration but a movement in need of continuation. If a dancer stops dancing, the dance is finished. No inertia will carry the show forward. This is why I needed to introduce the distinction between ostensive and performative: the object of an ostensive definition remains there, whatever happens to the index of the onlooker. But the object of a performative definition vanishes when it is no longer performed—or if it stays, then it means that other actors have taken over the relay. And this relay, by definition, cannot be ‘the social world’, since it is that very world which is in dire need of a fresh relay.

Durkheim having a Tardian moment As the following quotes from Durkheim’s famous passage on the role of totems in group-making show, the difference is extremely subtle between a mediator and an intermediary. Does the totem express the group, facilitate its cohesion, or is it what allows the group to exist as a group?

Here is how Durkheim (1915/1947: 230–31, 233) addresses the issue:

To take two of the very few technical terms I will need in this introductory book, it makes a huge difference whether the means to produce the social are taken as intermediaries or as mediators. At the beginning, the bifurcation seems small, but it will later on lead us into different territories. To be sure, this nuance will be fully visible only at the close of this book—if the reader is patient enough to reach it! Yet we should try to get familiar with it as early as possible as it will be our shibboleth throughout.

An intermediary, in my vocabulary, is what transports meaning or force without transformation: defining its inputs is enough to define its outputs. For all practical purposes, an intermediary can be taken not only as a black box, but also as a black box counting for one, even if it is internally made of many parts. Mediators, on the other hand, cannot be counted as just one; they might count for one, for nothing, for several, or for infinity. Their input is never a good predictor of their output; their specificity has to be taken into account every time.[^30]

Mediators transform, translate, distort, and modify the meaning or the elements they are supposed to carry. No matter how complicated an intermediary is, it may, for all practical purposes, count for just one— or even for nothing at all because it can be easily forgotten. No matter how apparently simple a mediator may look, it may become complex; it may lead in multiple directions which will modify all the contradictory accounts attributed to its role. A properly functioning computer could be taken as a good case of a complicated intermediary while a banal conversation may become a terribly complex chain of mediators where passions, opinions, and attitudes bifurcate at every turn. But if it breaks down, a computer may turn into a horrendously complex mediator while a highly sophisticated panel during an academic conference may become a perfectly predictable and uneventful intermediary in rubber stamping a decision made elsewhere.[^31] As we will slowly discover, it is this constant uncertainty over the intimate nature of entities—are they behaving as intermediaries or as mediators?—that is the source of all the other uncertainties we have decided to follow.

Once this definition is in place, we can see that it is not enough for sociologists to recognize that a group is made, ‘reproduced’, or ‘constructed’ through many means and expressed through many tools. As a matter of fact, when seeing what most sociologists call ‘construction’, one is not sure they have ever built anything as simple as a shack, not to mention a ‘society’ (more on this later, see p. 88). The real difference between the two schools of thought becomes visible when the ‘means’ or ‘tools’ used in ‘construction’ are treated as mediators and not as mere intermediaries. If this looks like splitting hairs, well it is, but this is because the tiny difference in direction taken by the two sociologies is no larger than a hair’s width. After all, if physicists have been able to dispose with the ether, it was thanks to quite a lot of hair-splitting.

If the nuance looks moot, its effects are radical. If, for instance, a social difference is ‘expressed in’ or ‘projected upon’ a detail of fashion, but that this detail—let’s say a shine of silk instead of nylon—is taken as an intermediary transporting faithfully some social meaning—‘silk is for high-brow’, ‘nylon for low-brow’—then it is in vain that an appeal has been made to the detail of the fabric. It has been mobilized purely for illustrative purposes. Even without the chemical difference between silk and nylon, the social difference between highand low-brow will have existed anyhow; it has simply been ‘represented’ or ‘reflected’ on a piece of cloth that has remained wholly indifferent to its composition. If, on the contrary, the chemical and manufacturing differences are treated as so many mediators, then it may happen that without the many indefinite material nuances between the feel, the touch, the color, the sparkling of silk and nylon, this social difference might not exist at all.[^32] It is this infinitesimal distinction between mediators and intermediaries that will produce, in the end, all the differences we need between the two types of sociologies. To sum up the contrast in a rudimentary way, the sociologists of the social believe in one type of social aggregates, few mediators, and many intermediaries; for ANT, there is no preferable type of social aggregates, there exist endless number of mediators, and when those are transformed into faithful intermediaries it is not the rule, but a rare exception that has to be accounted for by some extra work— usually by the mobilization of even more mediators![^33] No two viewpoints of the same object could be more different.

It is puzzling to see such a basic intuition not shared by mainstream sociology, although I claimed earlier that ANT was nothing but the recasting of the central hopes of social science. A possible reason for not recognizing earlier the essential parity between actors and social scientists all engaged in controversies about groups is that sociology has been involved, very early on, in social engineering. Since the beginning, there has been a sort of confusion of duties. By deciding that their job was to define what the social world is made of, sociologists in the middle of the 19th century took upon themselves the task of politics.[^34] If politics is defined, as we shall see later, as the progressive composition of collective life, some sociologists, tired of the revolutionary period, found a way to shortcut the slow and painful process of composition and decided to sort out by themselves what were the most relevant units of society. The simplest way was to get rid of the most extravagant and unpredictable ways in which actors themselves defined their own ‘social context’. Social theorists began to play legislator, strongly encouraged in this endeavor by the state that was engaged in the ruthless task of modernizing.[^35] In addition, this gesture could pass for proof of scientific creativity as scientists since Kant have had to ‘construct their own object’. Human actors were reduced to mere informants simply answering the questions of the sociologist qua judge, thus supposedly producing a discipline as scientific as chemistry or physics.[^36] Without this strong obligation to play the legislating role, sociologists would not have limited the first obvious source of uncertainty, cutting all the links with the explicit and reflexive labor of the actors’ own methods. Anthropologists, who had to deal with premoderns and were not requested as much to imitate natural sciences, were more fortunate and allowed their actors to deploy a much richer world. In many ways, ANT is simply an attempt to allow the members of contemporary society to have as much leeway in defining themselves as that offered by ethnographers. If, as I claim, ‘we have never been modern’, sociology could finally become as good as anthropology.[^37]

I believe that with the extremely light equipment defined above, we are now prepared to profit from the first source of uncertainty. Readers can begin mapping the many contradictory ways in which social aggregates are constantly evoked, erased, distributed, and reallocated. For scientific, political, and even moral reasons, it is crucial that enquirers do not in advance, and in place of the actors, define what sorts of building blocks the social world is made of. This lesson is negative, to be sure, but it’s a powerful way to reverse the political urge that itches so many critical sociologists. It might be time to put Marx’s famous quote back on its feet: ‘Social scientists have transformed the world in various ways; the point, however, is to interpret it.’ But to interpret, we need to abandon the strange idea that all languages are translatable in the already established idiom of the social. Such a preparatory training is important since, as we will see in the next chapter, social aggregates might not be made of human ties.

---

[^22]: Garfinkel’s ethnomethods would take the same starting points, beginning with mundane accounts instead of controversies or through the clever idea of ‘breaching’, which transforms even mundane encounters into controversies. See Harold Garfinkel (1967), Studies in Ethnomethodology. In both cases, the point is the same: it’s not the sociologist’s duty to decide in advance and in the member’s stead what the social world is made of—a very common idea for chemists, physicists, and naturalists, but it is still seen as provocative in the social sciences.

[^23]: One reason for this continuing uncertainty over the departure point—individual, structures, fields, trajectories, etc.—is due to the belief that society is ranked according to sizes ranging from Small to XXL. The origin of this misapprehension and the ways to avoid it will not be tackled until the second part of this book—see p. 175.

[^24]: Gabriel Tarde (1902), Psychologie e´conomique. The main work remains Karl Polanyi (1944), The Great Transformation, but see also Albert O. Hirshmann, The Passions and the Interests and Michel Callon (1998b), The Laws of the Markets as well as the fields of anthropology and economics. For recent empirical studies on an ANT perspective, see Fabian Muniesa (2004), Des marche´s comme algorithmes: sociologie de la cotation e´lectronique a` la Bourse de Paris’ and Vincent Le´pinay (2003), ‘Les formules du marche´. Ethno-Economie d’une innovation financie`re: les produits a` capital garanti’.

[^25]: It’s the great achievement of Tarde’s inter-psychology to relate the amount of influence with the increase in individualisation, see Gabriel Tarde (1901[1989]), L’opinion et la foule and Tarde, On Communication and Social Influence.

[^26]: No one has developed this as thoroughly as Garfinkel. See the famous case of Agnes’s uncertain gender affiliation and its critique in Norman K. Denzin (1990), ‘Harold and Agnes: A Feminist Narrative Undoing’.

[^27]: Reflexivity is a tricky term that has an interesting meaning when given to actors and objects and a deleterious one when taken as an epistemological virtue protecting the sociologist from a breach of objectivity. See Antoine Hennion (2004), ‘Pragmatics of Taste’.

[^28]: Not in the sense applied to social science in John Searle (1995), The Construction of Social Reality, but rather in that proposed in Ian Hacking (1992), ‘The Self-Vindication of the Laboratory Sciences’ to account for the success of natural science. To save naturalism, Searle defined the social world by bootstrapping, thus making the abyss even bigger

    between matters of fact and social law. One minute of inquiry breaks down the distinction, however, since it would be totally impossible to maintain something like money— his favorite example—without materials and that not one single matter of fact can be defined without categories, formalism, convention, and translation starting with measurements. See p. 109.

[^29]: The word ‘reproduction’, so often used in expressions like ‘social reproduction’, takes up two entirely different meanings depending on the relationship between the product and the ‘reproducer’. Most of the time, the product is fully predicted by the progenitor. Thus nothing is added by the ‘re’-production, which is seen only as a chain of necessary but largely passive intermediaries.

    ‘That an emblem is useful as a rallying center for any sort of a group it is superfluous to point out. By expressing the social unity in a material form, it makes this more obvious to all, and for that very reason the use of emblematic symbols must have spread very quickly once thought of. But more than that, this idea should spontaneously arise out of the conditions of common life; for the emblem is not merely a convenient process for clarifying the sentiment the society has of itself: it also serves to create this sentiment; it is one of its constituent elements.

    Moreover, without symbols, social sentiments could have only a precarious existence . . . . But if the movements by which these sentiments are expressed are connected with something that endures, the sentiments themselves become more durable. These other things are constantly bringing them to mind and arousing them; it is as though the cause which excited them in the first place continued to act. Thus these systems of emblems, which are necessary if society is to become conscious of itself, are no less indispensable for assuring the continuation of this consciousness.

    So we must refrain from regarding these symbols as simple artifices, as sorts of labels attached to representations already made, in order to make them more manageable: they are an integral part of them ( . . . )

    The unity of the group is visible, therefore, only in the collective emblem reproducing the object designated by this name. A clan is essentially a reunion of individuals who bear the same name and rally around the same sign. Take away the name and the sign which materializes it and the clan is no longer representable.’

[^30]: That the relations between causes and effects are to be altered requires nothing out of the ordinary. Before the lily has learned to extract the sun energy through photosynthesis, the sun is not the ‘cause’ of the lily; before Venice learned to rise out of the water, the lagoon was not one of the reasons for its development. Causes and effects are only a retrospective way of interpreting events. This is true of ‘social’ and ‘natural’ events. On this philosophy of causality, see Isabelle Stengers (2002), Penser avec Whitehead.

[^31]: For a use of this distinction between complexity and complication, see Shirley Strum and Bruno Latour (1987), ‘The Meanings of Social: from Baboons to Humans’.

[^32]: For the socio-chemical history of nylon, see Susannah Handley (2000), Nylon: The Story ofaFashionRevolution:ACelebrationofDesignfromArtSilk toNylonandThinkingFibres. See the Coco Chanel biography by Axel Madsen (1991), Chanel: AWoman of Her Own.

[^33]: This stabilization of controversies through the key notions of forms and standards will be tackled in Part II.

[^34]: On the place of social sciences among the sciences of government, see Paolo Napoli (2003), Naissance de la police moderne: Pouvoirs, normes, socie´te´ and Audren, ‘Les juristes et les sociologues’.

[^35]: I am using here the argument made most clearly in Zygmunt Bauman (1992), Intimations of Postmodernity, who differentiates between ‘legislators’ and ‘interpreters’. Tarde is interesting precisely because he escaped, as did Garfinkel later, from the legislating role.

[^36]: The epistemology of the social sciences has been obsessed with this theme of the right of the observer to define the type of entities one had to deal with, this theme itself being a strange philosophy of science borrowed, in the French case at least, from Gaston Bachelard’s interpretation of physics. See Pierre Bourdieu, Jean-Claude Chamboredon and Jean-Claude Passeron (1991), Craft of Sociology: Epistemological Preliminaries, which is almost exclusively built on Bachelard’s philosophy of science. It’s clear that any change in the conception of science will modify the claims and duties of the social science.

[^37]: Although I have written on this question of modernism—how to define it, how to study it, and how to overcome it in Bruno Latour (1993), We Have Never Been Modern—I have left it aside here to concentrate instead on the social theory that an alternative to modernism would require—the other requirement being a parallel change in the conception of nature, as I have shown in Latour, Politics of Nature.
