# Second Source of Uncertainty: Action Is Overtaken

_Source pages: 54–73_

In most situations, we use ‘social’ to mean that which has already been assembled and acts as a whole, without being too picky on the precise nature of what has been gathered, bundled, and packaged together. When we say that ‘something is social’ or ‘has a social dimension’, we mobilize one set of features that, so to speak, march in step together, even though it might be composed of radically different types of entities. This unproblematic use of the word is fine as long as we don’t confuse the sentence ‘Is social what goes together?’, with one that says, ‘social designates a particular kind of stuff’. With the former we simply mean that we are dealing with a routine state of affairs whose binding together is the crucial aspect, while the second designates a sort of substance whose main feature lies in its differences with other types of materials. We imply that some assemblages are built out of social stuff instead of physical, biological, or economical blocks, much like the houses of the Three Little Pigs were made of straw, wood, and stone. To avoid this confusion between the two meanings of social, we have to open a second source of uncertainty, one dealing this time with the heterogeneous nature of the ingredients making up social ties.

When we act, who else is acting? How many agents are also present? How come I never do what I want? Why are we all held by forces that are not of our own making? Such is the oldest and most legitimate intuition of those sciences, that which has fascinated since the time when crowds, masses, statistical means, invisible hands, and unconscious drives began to replace the passions and reasons, not to mention the angels and demons that had pushed and pulled our humble souls up to then. In the previous chapter, we learned to trace social connections using the unexpected trails left by the controversies about group formation. Social scientists and actors were on par with each other and both raised essentially the same type of question: How do we know what the social world is made of? We now have to learn how to exploit a second source of uncertainty, one that is even more fundamental and which resides at the heart of all the social sciences, namely that which sees action as not transparent. Action is not done under the full control of consciousness; action should rather be felt as a node, a knot, and a conglomerate of many surprising sets of agencies that have to be slowly disentangled. It is this venerable source of uncertainty that we wish to render vivid again in the odd expression of actor-network.

That we are never alone in carrying out a course of action requires but a few examples. For instance, you have become so estranged from your parents by a university degree that you have become ashamed of how dumb they are. Reading critical sociologists, you realize that this is the common experience of a whole generation of ‘upwardly mobile’ young kids from ‘lower class’ families lacking ‘cultural capital’. And this is when you begin to wonder who has estranged you from your very kin, who has molded your voice, your manners, your face so differently from theirs? Perhaps a strange beast that pertains to no one in particular and who is nobody’s responsibility. It is a force to be sure, maybe a habitus. Second, you think you are in love with your future partner. You read a statistical study of marriage patterns where his age, his height, his revenue, his degrees, the distance between his town and yours fit, within a very small margin, in the mean range of what thousands of other young girls are in love with at almost exactly the same period. So, who is in love then? Others for sure, a strange alien agency that does not look like you, which has no eyes, no mouth, no ears but which acts all the same. But how exactly?

Villages appear to dot the landscape haphazardly until an archaeologist excavates the ancient road networks and realizes that all the settlements align perfectly on some ancient causeways, simply separated by the mean day march of the Roman legions. Who has created the settlement there? What force has been exerted? How could Caesar still be acting through the present landscape? Is there some other alien agency endowed with the long-lasting subterranean power to make settlers ‘freely choose’ the very place it has allotted them? Here again you wonder, and you wonder even more when you realize, watching the stock exchange one morning, that ten million of your fellow shareholders have sold the same stocks that day, as if your collective mind had been solidly swayed by the invisible hand of some invisible giant. At the school’s open-house party, you wonder why all the parents look eerily familiar: same clothes, same jewels, same ways of articulating words, same ambitions for their kids. What makes all of us do the same thing at the same time? In the long and variegated history of their disciplines, the social scientists, sociologists, historians, geographers, linguists, psychologists, and economists had to multiply— like their colleagues in the natural sciences—agencies to account for the complexity, diversity, and heterogeneity of action. Each had to find a way to tame those many aliens who barged in as uninvited guests in everything we seem to be doing.

That these examples have spurred on the development of the social sciences is something we nowadays take for granted. And ANT wishes for nothing else than to inherit this tradition and this intuition. Action is overtaken or, as one Swedish friend transcribed this dangerous Hegelian expression, action is other-taken! So it is taken up by others and shared with the masses. It is mysteriously carried out and at the same time distributed to others. We are not alone in the world. ‘We’, like ‘I’, is a wasp’s nest; as the poet Rimbaud wrote: ‘Je est un autre’.[^38]

But there is a huge, an insurmountable, an abysmal gap in going from this intuition—action is overtaken—to the usual conclusion that a social force has taken over. While ANT wishes to inherit from the first, it wants to inhibit the second step; it wants to show that between the premise and the consequence there exists a huge gap, a complete non sequitur. For the social sciences to regain their initial energy, it’s crucial not to conflate all the agencies overtaking the action into some kind of agency—‘society’, ‘culture’, ‘structure’, ‘fields’, ‘individuals’, or whatever name they are given—that would itself be social. Action should remain a surprise, a mediation, an event. It is for this reason that we should begin, here again, not from the ‘determination of action by society’, the ‘calculative abilities of individuals’, or the ‘power of the unconscious’ as we would ordinarily do, but rather from the under-determination of action, from the uncertainties and controversies about who and what is acting when ‘we’ act—and there is of course no way to decide whether this source of uncertainty resides in the analyst or in the actor. If we have to readily accept the central intuition of social sciences—if not there would be no reason to call oneself a ‘social’ scientist—we should move very slowly so as to remove the poison that is secreted when this intuition is transformed into ‘something social’ that carries out the acting. Contrary to what so many ‘social explanations’ seem to imply, the two arguments not only don’t follow one another, but they are in complete contradiction with one another. Since that which makes us act is not made of social stuff, it can be associated together in new ways.[^39]

An actor is what is made to act by many others

An ‘actor’ in the hyphenated expression actor-network is not the source of an action but the moving target of a vast array of entities swarming toward it. To retrieve its multiplicity, the simplest solution is to reactivate the metaphors implied in the word actor that I have used so far as an unproblematic placeholder.

It is not by accident that this expression, like that of ‘person’, comes from the stage. Far from indicating a pure and unproblematic source of action, they both lead to puzzles as old as the institution of theater itself—as Jean-Paul Sartre famously showed in his portrait of the garc¸on de cafe´ who no longer knows the difference between his ‘authentic self’ and his ‘social role’.[^40] To use the word ‘actor’ means that it’s never clear who and what is acting when we act since an actor on stage is never alone in acting. Play-acting puts us immediately into a thick imbroglio where the question of who is carrying out the action has become unfathomable. As soon as the play starts, as Irwin Goffman has so often showed, nothing is certain: Is this for real? Is it fake?[^41]

Does the audience’s reaction count? What about the lighting? What is the backstage crew doing? Is the playwright’s message faithfully transported or hopelessly bungled? Is the character carried over? And if so, by what? What are the partners doing? Where is the prompter? If we accept to unfold the metaphor, the very word actor directs our attention to a complete dislocation of the action, warning us that it is not a coherent, controlled, well-rounded, and clean-edged affair. By definition, action is dislocated.[^42] Action is borrowed, distributed, suggested, influenced, dominated, betrayed, translated. If an actor is said to be an actor-network, it is first of all to underline that it represents the major source of uncertainty about the origin of action—the turn of the word ‘network’ will come in due time. Like Jesus on the cross, it is of the actor that one should always say: ‘Forgive them Father, they know not what they do.’

It’s not because there is some hesitation about the source of action that we have to hurry to say where it springs from, taking for instance the ‘global forces of society’, the ‘transparent calculations of the self’, the ‘inner passions of the heart’, the ‘intentionality of the person’, the ‘gnawing scruples of moral consciousness’, ‘the roles given to us by social expectations’, or ‘bad faith’. Uncertainty should remain uncertain throughout because we don’t want to rush into saying that actors may not know what they are doing, but that we, the social scientists, know that there exists a social force ‘making them do’ things unwittingly. Inventing a hidden social drive, an unconscious, would be a sure way of reintroducing this ether of the social that we try to dispense with. Not because actors know what they are doing and social scientists don’t, but because both have to remain puzzled by the identity of the participants in any course of action if they want to assemble them again.

It’s precisely because the social is not yet made that sociologists of associations should keep as their most cherished treasure all the traces that manifest the hesitations actors themselves feel about the ‘drives’ that make them act. It is the only way to render productive again the central intuition of the social sciences—before it gets sterilized into an argument about the action of some social stuff. This is why we should paradoxically take all the uncertainties, hesitations, dislocations, and puzzlements as our foundation. Just as actors are constantly engaged by others in group formation and destruction (the first uncertainty), they engage in providing controversial accounts for their actions as well as for those of others. Here again, as soon as the decision is made to proceed in this direction, traces become innumerable and no study will ever stop for lack of information on those controversies. Every single interview, narrative, and commentary, no matter how trivial it may appear, will provide the analyst with a bewildering array of entities to account for the hows and whys of any course of action. Social scientists will fall asleep long before actors stop deluging them with data.

The mistake we must learn to avoid is listening distractedly to these convoluted productions and to ignore the queerest, baroque, and most idiosyncratic terms offered by the actors, following only those that have currency in the rear-world of the social. Alas, this mistake is made so often that it passes for good scientific method, producing most of the artifacts of social explanations. When a criminal says, ‘It is not my fault, I had bad parents’, should we say that ‘society made her a criminal’ or that ‘she is trying to escape her own personal culpability by diluting it in the anonymity of society’—as Mrs Thatcher would have certainly commented. But the criminal said nothing of that sort. She simply said, ‘I had bad parents.’ Bad parenting, if we take it seriously, is not automatically translatable into something else and certainly not into society—and she did not say ‘castrating mother’ either. We have to resist the idea that there exists somewhere a dictionary where all the variegated words of the actors can be translated into the few words of the social vocabulary.[^43] Will we have the courage not to substitute an unknown expression for a well-known one? Here lies the most morally, politically, and scientifically relevant difference between the two sociologies.

Even more difficult is when a pilgrim says, ‘I came to this monastery because I was called by the Virgin Mary.’ How long should we resist smiling smugly, replacing at once the agency of the Virgin by the ‘obvious’ delusion of an actor ‘finding pretext’ in a religious icon to ‘hide’ one’s own decision? Critical sociologists will answer: ‘Just as far as to be polite, it’s bad manners to sneer in the presence of the informant.’ A sociologist of associations meanwhile must learn to say: ‘As long as possible in order to seize the chance offered by the pilgrim to fathom the diversity of agencies acting at once in the world.’ If it is possible to discover today that ‘the Virgin’ is able to induce pilgrims to board a train against all the scruples that tie them to home, that is a miracle indeed.[^44] When a famous soprano says, ‘It is my voice who tells me when to stop and when to begin’, how quickly should the sociologist jump to the conclusion that the singer offers here a ‘typical case’ of ‘false consciousness’, artists being always too ready to take what is of their own making as the fetish that makes them do things?[^45]

Is it not abundantly clear that this singer should not be listened to but instead ‘freed from her own delusion’ by the courageous exposition of her lies. Down with Muses and other undocumented aliens! And yet, the soprano did say that she shared her life with her voice that made her do certain things. Are we able to treasure this odd way of speaking or not? It was very precise, very revealing, very telling, and also very moving. Is not being moved, or rather, put into motion by the informants exactly what we should mean by an enquiry?

The painful lesson we must learn is exactly the opposite of what is still being taught all over the world under the name of a ‘social explanation’, namely we must not substitute a surprising but precise expression that is the well-known repertoire of the social which is supposed to be hidden behind it. We have to resist pretending that actors have only a language while the analyst possesses the metalanguage in which the first is ‘embedded’. As I said earlier, analysts are allowed to possess only some infra-language whose role is simply to help them become attentive to the actors’ own fully developed metalanguage, a reflexive account of what they are saying. In most cases, social explanations are simply a superfluous addition that, instead of revealing the forces behind what is said, dissimulates what has been said, as Garfinkel has never tired of showing.[^46] And it is no use claiming that natural scientists also keep adding hidden entities in order to make sense of phenomena. When natural scientists invoke invisible entities, it is to account for the trickiest details of the matter at hand, not to look away from embarrassing information to less recalcitrant ones!

Of course, there exist perfectly respectable reasons for this confusion as I briefly indicated already: the political agenda of many social theorists has taken over their libido sciendi. They considered that their real duty was not so much to inventory active agencies in the world as to clean out the many forces that, in their eyes, are cluttering the world and that maintain people in a state of alienation—‘Virgins’ and ‘fetishes’ being among the worst offenders. The task of emancipation to which they have devoted themselves requires that they rarefy the number of acceptable entities. So they think they are entitled to change their job description, forgetting that their duty is not to decide how the actors should be made to act, but rather to retrace the many different worlds actors are elaborating for one another. At which point they begin deciding for themselves what is an acceptable list of entities to make up the social world. But it seems obvious that a policy aimed at artificially withdrawing from the world most of the entities to be taken into account cannot claim to lead to emancipation.

What is even more dangerous in the inconsiderate acceptance of hidden variables is to shift from the sociology of the social to critical sociology.[^47] This is the only discipline that finds itself scientific when it not only ignores data and replaces it with uncontroversial data from already assembled social forces, but also when it takes the indignant reactions of those who are thus ‘explained’ as what proves the unbearable truth of the critics’ interpretations. At this point sociology stops being empirical and becomes ‘vampirical’. It’s the great tragedy of the social sciences that this lesson was not heeded and that critical sociologists still consider as their treasure what they should rather be ashamed of, namely confusing what obfuscates data with what is revealed by it. Would you qualify as ‘scientific’ a discipline that puts to one side the precise information offered by fieldwork and replaces it by instances of other things that are invisible and those things people have not said and have vocally denied? For once, it’s sociologists of associations who are following common sense. For them, controversies about agencies have to be deployed to the full, no matter how difficult it is so as not to simplify in advance the task of assembling the collective.

This does not mean that we should abstain from alluding to hidden variables forever, or that we have to believe that actors live the pristine clarity of some ego cogito in full command of their own actions. Quite the contrary, we have just seen that the most powerful insight of social sciences is that other agencies over which we have no control make us do things. In the next chapter, we will have many occasions to see how action is distributed among agents, very few of whom look like humans.[^48] The reason why we want to be cautious with any social explanation is for the simple fact that hidden variables have become packaged in such a way that there is no control window to check what is inside. Explaining in ‘instant sociology’ has become a cinch, much like ‘instant psychoanalysis’. Their accounts have become as impossible to probe and repair as a black-boxed electronic appliance. It’s because the very success of social explanations has rendered them so cheap that we now have to increase the cost and the quality control on what counts as a hidden force.[^49]

An enquiry into practical metaphysics

If we call metaphysics the discipline inspired by the philosophical tradition that purports to define the basic structure of the world, then empirical metaphysics is what the controversies over agencies lead to since they ceaselessly populate the world with new drives and, as ceaselessly, contest the existence of others.[^50] The question then becomes how to explore the actors’ own metaphysics. Sociologists of the social have answered by abstaining from metaphysics altogether and by cutting all relations with philosophy, that fanciful and non empirical discipline which represents the lowly infancy of the now mature social sciences. They have also strictly limited the set of agencies ‘really acting’ in the world so as to free actors from their delusion, prepare the ground for social engineering on a grand scale, and smooth the path toward modernization.[^51]

It is no wonder that this program ended up going nowhere. As anthropologists have tirelessly shown, actors incessantly engage in the most abstruse metaphysical constructions by redefining all the elements of the world. Only a researcher trained in the conceptual calisthenics offered by the philosophical tradition could be quick, strong, daring, and pliable enough to painstakingly register what they have to say. Agency is about the most difficult problem there is in philosophy. How could enquirers listen to a housewife, a clerk, a pilgrim, a criminal, a soprano, and a CEO and still succeed in following what they express if they had no Hegel, no Aristotle, no Nietzsche, no Dewey, no Whitehead to help them? Have those writers not done quite a lot of useful work to open up what an agency could be? It does not mean that philosophers will know better, go deeper, be more profound than social scientists, nor does it mean that they will provide sociology with its ‘foundation’ or indulge in ‘meta-theory’. It means that cutting the social sciences from the reservoirs of philosophical innovations is a recipe to make sure that no one will ever notice the metaphysical innovations proposed by ordinary actors— which often go beyond those of professional philosophers. And the situation will be even worse if social scientists not only abstain from metaphysics, but take as their duty to cling to the most limited list of agencies, ceaselessly translating the indefinite production of actors into their short one. Actors have many philosophies but sociologists think they should stick to only a few. Actors fill the world with agencies while sociologists of the social tell them which building blocks their world is ‘really’ made of. That they often do this for high-minded reasons, to be ‘politically relevant’, to be ‘critical’ for the good of the actors they wish to ‘free from the shackle of archaic powers’, does not reassure me. Even if it were excellent politics, which it is not as we shall see, it would still be bad science.

There is, of course, a more respectable and practical reason to limit in advance the list of agencies that make actors do things. Apart from the social theorists’ infatuation with emancipation politics, it is the sheer difficulty of following their proliferation. And it is true that to ask enquirers to indulge in empirical metaphysics, to send them trotting behind the actors themselves, is no easy task. However, if agencies are innumerable, controversies about agency have a nice way of ordering themselves. The solution is the same as with the former source of uncertainty: although there exists an indefinite list of groups, we could devise a small list of handles allowing the sociologist to move from one group formation to the next. In the same way, I think it is possible to propose a limited set of grips to follow the ways in which actors credit or discredit an agency in the accounts they provide about what makes them act.

It might still appear paradoxical, although less so as this book proceeds, but feeding off controversies offers a much safer way than the implausible task of setting up a priori, and in the actors’ stead, what groups and which agencies will, from now on, be allowed to fill the social world. Once again, displacement from one frame of reference to the next allows for more freedom of movement than any absolute or arbitrary viewpoint. And to take up again the metaphor of a travel guide, freedom of movement becomes crucial—even if it is to force the traveler to proceed even more slowly!

A list to map out controversies over agency

Although we never know for sure who and what is making us act, we can define a list of features which are always present in contradictory arguments about what has happened: agencies are part of an account; they are given a figure of some sort; they are opposed to other competing agencies; and, finally, they are accompanied by some explicit theory of action.

First, agencies are always presented in an account as doing something, that is, making some difference to a state of affairs, transforming some This seems obvious enough and yet worth pointing out to those intoxicated with too many invisible and unaccountable social forces. In ANT, it is not permitted to say: ‘No one mentions it. I have no proof but I know there is some hidden actor at work here behind the scene.’ This is conspiracy theory, not social theory. The presence of the social has to be demonstrated each time anew; it can never be simply postulated. If it has no vehicle to travel, it won’t move an inch, it will leave no trace, it won’t be recorded in any sort of document. Even to detect Polonius behind the arras that became his shroud, the Prince of Denmark needed to hear the squeak of a rat.

Second, if agency is one thing, its figuration is another. What is doing the action is always provided in the account with some flesh and features that make them have some form or shape, no matter how vague. ‘Figuration’ is one of those technical terms I need to introduce to break the knee-jerk reactions of ‘social explanation’ because it is essential to grasp that there exist many more figures than anthropomorphic ones. This is one of the many cases where sociology has to accept to become more abstract. To endow an agency with anonymity gives it exactly as much a figure as when it is endowed with a name, a nose, a voice, or a face. It’s just making it ideo- instead of anthropomorphic. Statistical aggregates obtained from a questionnaire and given a label—like A and B types in the search for the causes of heart disease—are as concrete as ‘my red-faced sanguine neighbor who died last Saturday from a stroke while planting his turnips because he ate too much fat’. To say ‘culture forbids having kids out of wedlock’ requires, in terms of figuration, exactly as much work as saying ‘my future mother-in-law wants me to marry her daughter’. To be sure the first figuration (anonymous) is different from the second one (my mother-in-law), but they both give a figure, a form, a cloth, a flesh to an agency forbidding me or forcing me to do things. As far as the question of figuration is concerned, there is no reason to say that the first is a ‘statistical abstraction’ while the other would be a ‘concrete actor’. Individual agencies, too, need abstract figurations. When people complain about ‘hypostasizing’ society, they should not forget that my mother-in-law is also a hypostasis—and so are of course individuals and calculative agents as much as the infamous Invisible Hand. This is exactly what the words ‘actor’ and ‘person’ mean: no one knows how many people are simultaneously at work in any given individual; conversely, no one knows how much individuality there can be in a cloud of statistical data points. Figuration endows them with a shape but not necessarily in the manner of a smooth portrait by a figurative painter. To do their job, sociologists need as much variety in ‘drawing’ actors as there are debates about figuration in modern and contemporary art.

To break away from the influence of what could be called ‘figurative sociology’, ANT uses the technical word actant that comes from the study of literature. Here are four ways to figure out the same actant: ‘Imperialism strives for unilateralism’; ‘The United States wishes to withdraw from the UN’; ‘Bush Junior wishes to withdraw from the UN’; ‘Many officers from the Army and two dozen neo-con leaders want to withdraw from the UN.’ That the first is a structural trait, the second a corporate body, the third an individual, the fourth a loose aggregate of individuals makes a big difference of course to the account, but they all provide different figurations of the same actions. None of the four is more or less ‘realist’, ‘concrete’, ‘abstract’, or ‘artificial’ than the others. They simply lead to the entrenchment of different groups and thus helps to solve the first uncertainty about group formation. The great difficulty in ANT is not to be intimidated by the type of figuration: ideo-, or techno-, or bio-morphisms are ‘morphism’ just as much as the incarnation of some actant into a single individual.[^52][^53]

Because they deal with fiction, literary theorists have been much freer in their enquiries about figuration than any social scientist, especially when they have used semiotics or the various narrative sciences. This is because, for instance in a fable, the same actant can be made to act through the agency of a magic wand, a dwarf, a thought in the fairy’s mind, or a knight killing two dozen dragons.[^54] Novels, plays, and films from classical tragedy to comics provide a vast playground to rehearse accounts of what makes us act.[^55] For this reason, once the difference between actant and agency is understood, various sentences such as ‘moved by your own interest’, ‘taken over by social imitation’, ‘victims of social structure’, ‘carried over by routine’, ‘called by God’, ‘overcome by destiny’, ‘made by your own will’, ‘held up my norms’, and ‘explained by capitalism’ become fully comparable. They are simply different ways to make actors do things, the diversity of which is fully deployed without having to sort in advance the ‘true’ agencies from the ‘false’ ones and without having to assume that they are all translatable in the repetitive idiom of the social.

This is why ANT has borrowed from narrative theories, not all of their arguments and jargon to be sure, but their freedom of movement. It is for the same reason we refuse to be cut off from philosophy. It is not that sociology is fiction or because literary theorists would know more than sociologists, but because the diversity of the worlds of fiction invented on paper allow enquirers to gain as much pliability and range as those they have to study in the real world.[^56] It is only through some continuous familiarity with literature that ANT sociologists might become less wooden, less rigid, less stiff in their definition of what sort of agencies populate the world. Their language may begin to gain as much inventiveness as that of the actors they try to follow— also because actors, too, read a lot of novels and watch a lot of TV! It is only by constantly comparing complex repertoires of action that sociologists may become able to register data—a task that seems always very hard for the sociologists of the social who have to filter out everything which does not look in advance like a uniformed ‘social actor’. Recording not filtering out, describing not disciplining, these are the Laws and the Prophets.

Richard Powers on what is a firm In his novel Gain, Richard Powers (1998: 349–350) portrays the CEO of a big company as he is trying to prepare a pep talk to his staff:

Third, actors also engage in criticizing other agencies accused of being fake, archaic, absurd, irrational, artificial, or illusory. In the same way group performation maps out for the benefit of the enquirer the anti-groups making up their social world, accounts of agency will constantly add new entities while withdrawing others as illegitimate. Thus, each actor will map out for the benefit of the analyst the empirical metaphysics to which they are both confronted. Now let us examine the following statements: ‘I refuse to be taken over by the general opinion which is pure propaganda anyway’; ‘You are thinking like your whole generation’; ‘Social structure is an empty term, there exists only individual action’; ‘God is not talking to you, imams are talking in His place’; ‘Market forces are much wiser than bureaucrats’; ‘Your unconscious has betrayed itself through this clever slip of the tongue’; ‘I prefer wild salmon to mankind.’[^57] It’s as if each of these sentences was making some additions and subtractions to the list of agencies endowed with a legitimate role in the world.

The only thing that can stop the enquiry is the decision by analysts to choose among these moves the ones that they deem more reasonable. This does not mean that social scientists are powerless, that they are always on the leash of their informants. However, if they want to propose an alternative metaphysics, they have to first engage in the world-making activities of those they study. It will not be enough to say that they—the analysts—know in advance who the actors really are and what makes them really act. Neither will it do to disguise this sort of voluntarily blindness as a claim for reflexivity. Too often, social scientists—and especially critical sociologists—behave as if they were ‘critical’, ‘reflexive’, and ‘distanced’ enquirers meeting a ‘naı¨ve’, ‘uncritical’, and ‘un-reflexive’ actor. But what they too often mean is that they translate the many expressions of their informants into their own vocabulary of social forces. The analyst simply repeats what the social world is already made of; actors simply ignore the fact that they have been mentioned in the analyst’s account.[^58]

Fourth, actors are also able to propose their own theories of action to explain how agencies’ effects are carried over.[^59] Being full-blown reflexive and skillful metaphysicians, actors—as ANT’s new default position proposes—also have their own meta-theory about how agency acts and more often than not it leaves the traditional metaphysician totally bewildered. They will not only enter into a controversy over which agency is taking over but also on the ways in which it is making its influence felt. And here again, the major distinction will be to decide whether the agency— once provided with existence, figuration, and opponents—is treated as an intermediary or as a mediator. In both cases, the outcome of the actor’s account will be deeply different.[^60]

It is crucial for what follows to understand that this difference cuts across all agencies, no matter what their figuration is. A so-called ‘anonymous and cold field of forces’ can be made to enter the account as a mediator, while a close, individual, ‘warm’, ‘lived in’ intentional person may be played out as a mere intermediary. The choice of a figuration, in other words, is a bad predictor of which theory of action will be invoked. What counts is not the type of figures but the range of mediators one is able to deploy. This is what has so confused the debates among the various schools of social sciences: they have insisted too much on which agency to choose and not enough on how each of them was supposed to act. It may happen that if one declares, ‘the state of productive forces determines the state of social representations’, then this becomes more active, that is, it generates more mediators than the apparently local, concrete, ‘lived’ and ‘existential’ sentence: ‘Individual human action is always intentional.’ Intentionality, if used to carry meaning as an intermediary, will do less than the more abstract and global ‘state of productive forces’, provided that this agency is treated as a mediator.[^61] So, figuration and theory of action are two different items in the list and should not be conflated with one another. If they are, the enquirer will be tempted to privilege some figurations as being ‘more concrete’ and others as ‘more abstract’, thus falling back into the legislative and policing role of the sociologists of the social and abandoning the firm ground of relativism.[^62]

How to make someone do something

If we decide to accept this second source of uncertainty, then sociology becomes the discipline that respects the dislocation inherent in making someone do something. In most theories of action, there is no such dislocation because the second term is predicted by the first: ‘Give me the cause and I will have the effect.’ But this is not the case when the two terms are taken as mediators. For intermediaries, there is no mystery since inputs predict outputs fairly well: nothing will be present in the effect that has not been in the cause. But there is always a problem with this apparently scientific way of speaking. If it were really the case that input predicts output, then it would be better to disregard the effects and be attentive to the causes where everything interesting has already happened—at least potentially. For mediators, the situation is different: causes do not allow effects to be deduced as they are simply offering occasions, circumstances, and precedents. As a result, lots of surprising aliens may pop up in between.[^63]

Such a distinction affects all agencies, whether it is the one whose figuration seems ‘abstract’—like ‘state of productive forces’—or ‘concrete’—like ‘my friend Julie’. As long as they are treated as causes simply transported through intermediaries, nothing will be added by the vehicles chosen to carry their effect forward. Causes, in such a strange and very archaic theology, are supposed to create things ex nihilo. But if vehicles are treated as mediators triggering other mediators, then a lot of new and unpredictable situations will ensue (they make things do other things than what was expected). Again it might look like hair-splitting, but the differences in the type of cartography are immense. The first solution draws maps of the world which are composed of a few agencies, followed by trails of consequences which are never much more than effects, expressions, or reflections of something else. The second solution, the one preferred by ANT, pictures a world made of concatenations of mediators where each point can be said to fully act.[^64] Thus, the key question for a social science is to decide whether it tries to deduce from a few causes as many of the effects that were there ‘in potentia’, or whether it tries to replace as many causes as possible by a series of actors—such is the technical meaning that the word ‘network’ will later take.[^65]

This point is horrendously difficult but for now it can be simplified through the use of a vignette. Sociologists are often accused of treating actors like so many puppets manipulated by social forces. But it appears that puppeteers, much like sopranos, possess pretty different ideas about what it is that makes their puppets do things. Although marionettes offer, it seems, the most extreme case of direct causality— just follow the strings—puppeteers will rarely behave as having total control over their puppets. They will say queer things like ‘their marionettes suggest them to do things they will have never thought This is especially important to keep in mind since sociology has been embarrassed—we will have many occasions to witness this in Part II—by the prejudice that there exists a privileged locus in the social domain where action is ‘concrete’: ‘parole’ more than ‘langue’, ‘event’ more than ‘structure’, ‘micro’ more than ‘macro’, ‘individual’ more than ‘masses’, ‘interaction’ more than ‘society’, or, on the contrary, ‘classes’ more than ‘individual’, ‘meaning’ more than ‘force’, ‘practice’ more than ‘theory’, ‘corporate bodies’ more than ‘persons’, and so on. But if action is dislocal, it does not pertain to any specific site; it is distributed, variegated, multiple, dislocated and remains a puzzle for the analysts as well as for the actors.[^66]

This point will help to not confuse ANT with one of the many polemical movements that have appealed to the ‘concreteness’ of the human individual with its meaningful, interacting, and intentional action against the cold, anonymous, and abstract effects of the ‘determination by social structures’, or that has ignored the meaningful lived world of individual humans for a ‘cold anonymous technical manipulation’ by matter. Most often inspired by phenomenology, these reform movements have inherited all its defects: they are unable to imagine a metaphysics in which there would be other real agencies than those with intentional humans, or worse, they oppose human action with the mere ‘material effect’ of natural objects which, as they say, have ‘no agency’ but only ‘behavior’.[^67] But an ‘interpretative’ sociology is just as much a sociology of the social than any of the ‘objectivist’ or ‘positivist’ versions it wishes to replace. It believes that certain types of agencies—persons, intention, feeling, work, face-to-face interaction—will automatically bring life, richness, and ‘humanity’.

This belief in the ‘lived world’ is a nice case of ‘misplaced concreteness’ to use Whitehead’s term: an account full of individuals might be more abstract than another consisting only of collective actors. A billiard ball hitting another one on the green felt of a billiard table might have exactly as much agency as a ‘person’ directing her ‘gaze’ to the ‘rich human world’ of another ‘meaningful face’ in the smokefilled room of the pub where the tables have been set up. This is not what phenomenologists and sociologists of the social might say, but then listen to what the players themselves are saying about their own ‘behaviors’ and the unpredictable ‘action’ of their billiard balls. They seem to produce quite a lot of the very imbroglios which are strictly forbidden by the theory that states that a radical difference should be maintained between ‘action’ and ‘behavior’.[^68] Here again, social scientists have too often confused their role of analyst with some sort of political call for discipline and emancipation.

It is in these kinds of spots that we have to take a decision if we want to trace social connections in new and interesting ways: we must either part company with the analysts who have only one fully worked out metaphysics or ‘follow the actors themselves’ who are getting by with more than one. Concreteness does not come from choosing some figuration over some other ones in the place of the actors, but from the increase, in the accounts, of the relative share of mediators over intermediaries. This will be the tell tale sign that indicates to us what is a good ANT study. For all these reasons, if there is one thing not to set up at the onset, it is the choice of a privileged locus where action is said to be more abundant. ‘Concrete’ and ‘abstract’ do not designate a specific type of character—the usual suspects of critical sociology. The only important differences to keep for now are the following: Which agencies are invoked? Which figurations are they endowed with? Through which mode of action are they engaged? Are we talking about causes and their intermediaries or about a concatenation of mediators? ANT is simply the social theory that has made the decision to follow the natives, no matter which metaphysical imbroglios they lead us into— and they quickly do as we shall see now!

---

[^38]: ‘Between the acting of a dreadful thing And the first motion, all the interim is Like a phantasma or a hideous dream The genius and the mortal instruments Are then in counsel, and the state of man Like a little kingdom, suffers then The nature of an insurrection’’

    Brutus in Shakespeare, Julius Caesar, II. i. 63–69.

[^39]: This is the exact opposite of the limitation proposed very sensibly by Weber: ‘Action is social in so far as, by virtue of the subjective meaning attached to it by the acting individual (or individuals), it takes account of the behavior of others and is thereby oriented in its course.’ Max Weber (1947), The Theory of Social and Economic Organization, p. 88.

[^40]: The famous episode is in Jean-Paul Sartre (1993), Being and Nothingness.

[^41]: Many examples have been made famous in Erving Goffman (1959), The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life.

[^42]: ‘Dislocal’ as proposed in Franc¸ois Cooren (2001), The Organizing Property of Communication.

[^43]: A powerful example of this nuance has been provided by drug addicts when they moved from being ‘patients’ or ‘delinquents’ to ‘drug-users’. On this see Emilie Gomart (1999), Surprised by Methadone. The`se de doctorat, Emilie Gomart (2002), ‘Methadone: Six Effects in Search of a Substance’ as well as the argument made in Isabelle Stengers (1991), Drogues, le de´fi hollandais.

[^44]: I am following here the marvellous lesson in methods provided in Elizabeth Claverie (2003), Les Guerres de la Vierge: Une anthropologie des apparitions. See also Patricia de Aquino (1998), ‘La mort de´faite. Rites fune´raires du candomble´’.

[^45]: Julia Varady in Bruno Monsaingeon’s film, Le chant posse´de´, dir. Bruno Monsaingeon (Ide´ale Audience, 1998).

[^46]: An ethno-method is the discovery that members possess a complete vocabulary and a complete social theory for understanding their behavior. See p. 57

[^47]: It comes into existence when the acceptable limits of social theory are exaggerated to the point where the existence of society is taken as stronger than the existence of everything else, including law, religion, economics, science, and technology, thus reversing the order of explanation and transforming all the actors into so many victims of illusions. At this point, critical sociology becomes indistinguishable from conspiracy theory, that is, a hybrid of the two most extreme forms of scepticism and gullibility.

[^48]: At the end of Part II, we will encounter the strange figure of the ‘plasma’, which takes the bottom out of any bottom line when accounting for action.

[^49]: It also means that there might be many other ways for an agency to be hidden than simply acting from behind and from the outside. Ethnomethodologists have now made familiar the famous formula ‘seen but not noticed’ and we will soon meet another one: to be made to act.

[^50]: Most social scientists would adamantly resist the idea that they have to indulge in metaphysics to define the social. But such an attitude means nothing more than sticking to one metaphysics, usually a very poor one that in no way can pay justice to the multiplicity of fundamental questions raised by ordinary actors. No one has gone further in criticizing this move than Tarde, especially in Tarde Monadologie et sociologie.

[^51]: A telling example of this confusion is provided by Randall Collins’s ‘social history’ of philosophers in Randall Collins (1998), The sociology of philosophies: a global theory of intellectual change. At no point does he realize that the philosophers whose ideas he is ‘explaining’ have dozens more arguments about what is a society, what is an influence, what is a group. To stick to the same impoverished meta-language for all the philosophers throughout history does not prove that one provides a social explanation of those philosophies.

[^52]: Accountability is a crucial aspect of ethnomethodology as well; it will become a textual account in Chapter 5.

[^53]: The notion of trial of strength is developed at length in Bruno Latour (1988), Irreductions. Trial—e´preuves—has also become the key notion of the moral sociology developed by Luc Boltanski. See Boltanski and The´venot, On Justification.

[^54]: It would be fairly accurate to describe ANTas being half Garfinkel and half Greimas: it has simply combined two of the most interesting intellectual movements on both sides of the Atlantic and has found ways to tap the inner reflexivity of both actor’s

    accounts and of texts. The classic work in semiotics is best summarized in Algirdas Julien Greimas and Joseph Courte`s (1982), Semiotics and Language: an Analytical Dictionary. For a recent presentation see Jacques Fontanille (1998), Se´miotique du discours.

[^55]: For some magnificent examples of the metaphysical freedom of semioticians, see Louis Marin (1989), Opacite´ de la peinture: Essais sur la repre´sentation; Louis Marin (1992), Des pouvoirs de l’image: Gloses; and Louis Marin (2001) ,On Representation. Although an enemy of semioticians, Thomas Pavel (2003), La pense´e du roman shows the incomparable freedom of movement of literary theorists.

[^56]: See Thomas Pavel (1986), Fictional Worlds.

    ‘To make a profit. To make a consistent profit. To make a profit in the long run. To make a living. To make things. To make things in the most economical way. To make the greatest number of things. To make things that last the longest. To make things for the longest possible time. To make things that people need. To make things that people desire. To make people desire things. To give meaningful employment. To give reliable employment. To give people something to do. To do something. To provide the greatest food for the greatest number. To promote the general welfare. To provide for the common defense. To increase the value of the common stock. To pay a regular dividend. To maximize the net worth of the firm. To advance the lot of all the stakeholders. To grow. To progress. To expand. To increase knowhow. To increase revenues and to decrease costs. To get the job done more cheaply. To compete efficiently. To buy low and sell high. To improve the hand that humankind has been dealt. To produce the next round of technological innovations. To rationalize nature. To improve the landscape. To shatter space and arrest time. To see what the human race can do. To amass the country’s retirement pension. To amass the capital required to do anything we want to do. To discover what we want to do. To vacate the premises before the sun dies out. To make life a little easier. To make people a little wealthier. To make people a little happier. To build a better tomorrow. To kick something back into the kitty. To facilitate the flow of capital. To preserve the corporation. To do business. To stay in business. To figure out the purpose of business.’

[^57]: Quoted in Christelle Gramaglia (2005), ‘La mise en cause environnementale comme principe d’association. Casuistique des affaires de pollution des eaux’.

[^58]: And as we will learn when dealing with the fifth uncertainty, since the actor’s presence or opinion has made no difference in the analyst’s account, they are not real actors and have literally not been ‘taken into account’. Thus, society, in the ANT sense, has not been reassembled and there is no chance whatsoever for such a sociology of the social to have any political relevance.

[^59]: So far social scientists have taken it as their duty to choose which one of those theories of action is right and thus intervening directly into the controversies instead of deploying them. This is the originality of The´venot’s enterprise: to map out the various regimes of action simultaneously at work among ordinary members. See Laurent The´venot (2002), ‘Which road to follow? The moral complexity of an ‘‘equipped’’ humanity’.

[^60]: As in the first uncertainty, social theorists, philosophers, psychologists, and social psychologists will here add to the controversies their own versions. A good example is provided by the disputes about the existence of a calculative individual.

[^61]: For instance, the typically postmodern slogan ‘I insist on specificity, locality, peculiarity’ may be as complacent as it is empty, while a ‘Great Narrative’ may trigger more acting voices in the end. Once again, the difference is not in the figures that are chosen, but in the relative proportion of mediators allowed to exist.

[^62]: To detect those differences we need a benchmark of textual quality that allows us to measure, so to speak, the relative density of mediators over intermediaries, something like taking the temperature of the textual account. As we will see in reviewing the fifth source of uncertainty, this will become a shibboleth for objectivity.

[^63]: That this is true also of experiments, we have learned from science studies starting with Harry Collins (1985), Changing Order. Replication and Induction In Scientific Practice and his most recent book, Harry Collins (2004), Gravity’s Shadow: The Search for Gravitational Waves, but also from ethnomethodology, see Michael Lynch (1985), Art and Artifact in Laboratory Science: A Study of Shop Work and Shop Talk in a Research Laboratory and Garfinkel in Harold Garfinkel, Michael Lynch and Eric Livingston (1981), ‘The Work of a Discovering Science Construed with Materials from the Optically Discovered Pulsar’. Actually, it was the early realization of the real complexity of the causal connections in the most formatted settings of natural sciences that rendered totally moot the description of action in social sciences. This transformation of the duties of social sciences because of the study of natural ones has been detected in Isabelle Stengers (2000), The Invention of Modern Science.

[^64]: In Deleuze’s parlance, the first has ‘realized potentials’, the second ‘actualized virtualities’. For a presentation of this opposition of concepts, see Franc¸ois Zourabichvili (2003), Le vocabulaire de Deleuze.

[^65]: See Victoria Nelson (2002), The Secret Life of Puppets.

[^66]: The point has been excellently made by the disciplines of ‘situated’ or ‘distributed’ cognition and whose results have been so important for ANT. See Edwin Hutchins (1995), Cognition in the Wild; Jean Lave (1988), Cognition in Practice: Mind, Mathematics and Culture in Everyday Life; and Lucy Suchman (1987), Plans and Situated Actions. The relation between ANTand those studies will be even stronger when the third uncertainty is considered. They will part company only when the fourth and fifth sources are considered.

[^67]: In spite of many efforts, especially in Don Ihde and Evan Selinger (2003), Chasing Technoscience. Matrix for Materiality, to reconcile ANT and phenomenology, the gaps between the two lines of interest remain too wide because of the excessive stress given by phenomenologists to the human sources of agency. It will grow even bigger when the three other uncertainties are piled up. This does not mean that we should deprive ourselves of the rich descriptive vocabulary of phenomenology, simply that we have to extend it to ‘non-intentional’ entities.

[^68]: This in spite of the spirited defence of the distinction in Harry Collins and Martin Kusch (1998), The Shape of Actions. What Human and Machines can Do.
