# Fourth Source of Uncertainty: Matters of Fact vs. Matters of Concern

_Source pages: 98–131_

Groups are made, agencies are explored, and objects play a role. Such are the three first sources of uncertainty we rely on if we want to follow the social fluid through its ever-changing and provisional shapes. So far, our core hypothesis may still remain acceptable to those who define social in the traditional sense of the word. To be sure, it requires more work: an extension of the list of actors and agencies; a deepening of the conflicts about practical metaphysics; an abandonment of the artificial divide between social and technical ‘dimensions’; a pursuit through areas scarcely visited until now; a new practice of finding controversies more rewarding and, in the end, more stable than absolute departure points; and, finally, an invitation to develop a puzzling new custom to generously share metalanguage, social theory, and reflexivity with the actors themselves who are no longer considered as mere ‘informants’. Still, the travels that are made possible by such a new departure point, although rougher and bumpier, have not requested any basic changes in the scientific outlook itself. After all, sociology may remain a science even though this means paying a higher price than expected, visiting sites that had not been anticipated, accepting more relativity, and deploying more contradictory philosophies than seemed necessary at first glance. On the whole, abandoning the ether of society to feed off of controversies doesn’t seem to be that much of a sacrifice. No matter how startling at first, new habits of thought might be quick to form.

Unfortunately, the difficulties we have to tackle do not stop at these three. A fourth source of uncertainty has to be accepted, and this one will lead us to the trickiest points of the sociology of associations as well as to its birthplace. Sociology of science, or what is known as ‘science studies’, is a convenient although banal translation into Constructivism vs. social constructivism

ANT is the story of an experiment so carelessly started that it took a quarter of century to rectify it and catch up with what its exact meaning was. It all started quite badly with the unfortunate use of the expression ‘social construction of scientific facts’. We now understand why the word ‘social’ could entail so much misunderstanding; it confused two entirely different meanings: a kind of stuff and a movement for assembling non-social entities. But why has the introduction of the word ‘construction’ triggered even more confusion? In accounting for this difficulty, I first hope to make clear why I give so much prominence to the tiny subfield of science studies. It has renewed the meaning of all the words making up this innocent little expression: what is a fact, what is a science, what is a construction, and what is social. Not so bad for an experiment so recklessly conducted![^107]

In plain English, to say something is constructed means that it’s not a mystery that has popped out of nowhere, or that it has a more humble but also more visible and more interesting origin. Usually, the great advantage of visiting construction sites is that they offer an ideal vantage point to witness the connections between humans and non-humans. Once visitors have their feet deep in the mud, they are easily struck by the spectacle of all the participants working hard at the time of their most radical metamorphosis.[^108] This is not only true of science but of all the other construction sites, the most obvious being those that are at the source of the metaphor, namely houses and buildings fabricated by architects, masons, city planners, real estate agents, and homeowners.[^109] The same is true of artistic practice.[^110]

The ‘making of’ any enterprise—films, skyscrapers, facts, political meetings, initiation rituals, haute couture, cooking—offers a view that is sufficiently different from the official one. Not only does it lead you backstage and introduce you to the skills and knacks of practitioners, it also provides a rare glimpse of what it is for a thing to emerge out of inexistence by adding to any existing entity its time dimension. Even more important, when you are guided to any construction site you are experiencing the troubling and exhilarating feeling that things could be different, or at least that they could still fail—a feeling never so deep when faced with the final product, no matter how beautiful or impressive it may be.

So, using the word ‘construction’ seemed at first ideal to describe a more realistic version of what it is for anything to stand. And indeed, in all domains, to say that something is constructed has always been associated with an appreciation of its robustness, quality, style, durability, worth, etc. So much so that no one would bother to say that a skyscraper, a nuclear plant, a sculpture, or an automobile is ‘constructed’. This is too obvious to be pointed out. The great questions are rather: How well designed is it? How solidly constructed is it? How durable or reliable is it? How costly is the material? Everywhere, in technology, engineering, architecture, and art, construction is so much a synonym for the real that the question shifts immediately to the next and really interesting one: Is it well or badly constructed?

At first, it seemed obvious to us—the early science students—that if there existed building sites where the usual notion of constructivism should be readily applied, it had to be the laboratories, the research institutes, and their huge array of costly scientific instruments. Even more so than in art, architecture, and engineering, science offered the most extreme cases of complete artificiality and complete objectivity moving in parallel. There could be no question that laboratories, particle accelerators, telescopes, national statistics, satellites arrays, giant computers, and specimen collections were artificial places the history of which could be documented in the same way as for buildings, computer chips, and locomotives. And yet there was not the slightest doubt that the products of those artificial and costly sites were the most ascertained, objective, and certified results ever obtained by collective human ingenuity. This is why it was with great enthusiasm that we began using the expression ‘construction of facts’ to describe the striking phenomenon of artificiality and reality marching in step. Moreover, to say that science, too, was constructed gave the same thrill as with all the other ‘makings of’: we went back stage; we learned about the skills of practitioners; we saw innovations come into being; we felt how risky it was; and we witnessed the puzzling merger of human activities and non-human entities. By watching the fabulous film that our colleagues the historians of science were shooting for us, we could attend, frame after frame, to the most incredible spectacle: truth being slowly achieved in breathtaking episodes without being sure of the result. As far as suspense was concerned, history of science outdid any plot Hollywood could imagine. Science for us became better than simply objective, it became interesting, just as interesting as it was for its practitioners engaged in its risky production.[^111]

Unfortunately, the excitation went quickly sour when we realized that for other colleagues in the social as well as natural sciences the word construction meant something entirely different from what common sense had thought until then. To say that something was ‘constructed’ in their minds meant that something was not true. They seemed to operate with the strange idea that you had to submit to this rather unlikely choice: either something was real and not constructed, or it was constructed and artificial, contrived and invented, made up and false. Not only could this idea not be reconciled with the sturdy meaning one had in mind when talking about a ‘well constructed’ house, a ‘well designed’ software, or a ‘well sculpted’ statue, but it flew in the face of everything we were witnessing in laboratories: to be contrived and to be objective went together. If you began breaking the seamless narratives of fact making into two branches, it made the emergence of any science simply incomprehensible. Facts were facts— meaning exact—because they were fabricated—meaning that they emerged out of artificial situations. Every scientist we studied was proud of this connection between the quality of its construction and the quality of its data. This strong connection was actually one’s main claim to fame. While the epistemologists might have forgotten this, etymology was there to remind everybody.[^112] We were prepared to answer the more interesting question: Is a given fact of science well or badly constructed? But certainly not to sway under this most absurd alternative: ‘Choose! Either a fact is real or it’s fabricated!’

And yet, it became painfully clear that if we wanted to go on using the word construction we would have to fight on two fronts: against the epistemologists who went on claiming that facts were ‘of course’ not constructed—which had about as much sense as saying that babies are not born out of their mother’s wombs—and against our ‘dear colleagues’ who seemed to imply that if facts were constructed then they were as weak as fetishes—or at least what they believed fetishists ‘believed’ in. At which point, it could have been safer to abandon the word ‘construction’ entirely—especially since the word ‘social’ had the same built-in defect of maddening our readers as surely as a torero’s cape in front of a bull. On the other hand, it remained an excellent term for all the reasons just mentioned. Especially useful was the clear fashion in which ‘construction’ focused on the scene in which humans and non-humans were fused together. Since the whole idea of the new social theory we were inventing was to renew in both directions what was a social actor and what was a fact, it remained crucial not to lose sight of those most extraordinary building sites where this double metamorphosis was occurring. This is why I thought it more appropriate to do with constructivism what we had done for relativism: thrown at us like insults, both terms had a much too honorable tradition not to be reclaimed as a glorious banner. After all, those who criticized us for being relativists never noticed that the opposite would be absolutism.[^113] And those who criticized us for being constructivists would have probably not wished to see that the opposite position, if words have any meaning, was fundamentalism.[^114]

On the one hand, it seemed easy enough to reclaim a sturdy meaning for this much maligned term construction: we simply had to use the new definition of social that was reviewed in the earlier chapters of this book. In the same way as a Socialist or an Islamic Republic is the opposite of a Republic, adding the adjective ‘social’ to ‘constructivism’ completely perverts its meaning. In other words, ‘constructivism’ should not be confused with ‘social constructivism’. When we say that a fact is constructed, we simply mean that we account for the solid objective reality by mobilizing various entities whose assemblage could fail; ‘social constructivism’ means, on the other hand, that we replace what this reality is made of with some other stuff, the social in which it is ‘really’ built. An account about the heterogeneous genesis of a building is substituted by another one dealing with the homogeneous social matter in which it is built. To bring constructivism back to its feet, it’s enough to see that once social means again association, the whole idea of a building made of social stuff vanishes. For any construction to take place, non-human entities have to play the major role and this is just what we wanted to say from the beginning with this rather innocuous word.

But obviously this rescue operation was not enough since the rest of the social sciences seemed to share a completely different notion of the same term. How could that be? Our mistake was that since we had never shared the idea that construction could mean a reduction to only one type of material, we produced antibodies against the accusation that we had reduced facts to ‘mere construction’ only very slowly. Since it was obvious to us that ‘social construction’ meant a renewed attention to the number of heterogeneous realities entering into the fabrication of some state of affairs, it took years for us to react in a balanced way to the absurd theories with which we appeared to be associated.[^115] Even though constructivism was for us a synonym for an increase in realism, we were feted by our colleagues in social critique as having shown at last that ‘even science is bunk’! It took me a long time to realize the danger of an expression that, in the hands of our ‘best friends’, apparently meant some type of revenge against the solidity of scientific facts and an expose´ of their claim to truth. They seemed to imply that we were doing for science what they were so proud of having done for religion, art, law, culture, and everything the rest of us believe in, namely reducing it to dust by showing it was made up. For someone who had never been trained in critical sociology, it was hard to imagine that people could use the causal explanation in their own discipline as proof that the phenomena they were accounting for didn’t really exist, not to mention that they were associating the artificiality of the construction with a deficit in reality. Unwittingly, constructivism had become a synonym of its opposite number: deconstruction.

No wonder that our excitement in showing the ‘social construction of scientific fact’ was met with such fury by the actors themselves! For physicists, it is far from the same thing to settle complex controversies about black holes or to be presented instead with ‘power struggles among physicists’. For a religious soul, it is far from the same thing to address God in prayer and to be said to pray only to ‘the personalization of Society’. For a lawyer, it is not the same thing to obey the Constitution or to yield to powerful lobbies hidden behind the law. For a haute couture seamstress, it is not the same to cut through thick and shiny velvet or to be said to make ‘social distinction’ visible. For a follower of a cult, it’s not the same thing to be tied to the existence of a divinity and to be told that one adores a fetish made out of wood. The substitution of the social with other stuff seems to every actor a catastrophic loss to be adamantly resisted—and rightly so! If, however, the word social is not used to replace one kind of stuff by another, but is used instead to deploy the associations that have rendered some state of affairs solid and durable, then another social theory might become audible at last.

How could there be, we wondered, such a divide in the basic duties of social science? This is why it slowly dawned on us that there was something deeply flawed not only in the standard philosophy of science, but also in the standard social theories used to account for other domains than science. This is what made ANTscholars at first look either too critical—they were accused of attacking ‘even’ matters of facts and of not ‘believing’ in ‘Nature’ or in ‘outside reality’—or much too naive—they believed in the agencies of ‘real things’ that were ‘out there’.[^116] In effect, what ANT was trying to modify was simply the use of the whole critical repertoire by abandoning simultaneously the use of Nature and the use of Society, which had been invented to reveal ‘behind’ social phenomena what was ‘really taking place’. This, however, meant a complete reinterpretation of the experiment that we had conducted, at first unwittingly, when trying to account sociologically for the production of science. After all, there is a lot to be said in favor of red flags in the hands of clever toreros as they might, in the end, allow one to tame the wild beast.

The fortunate wreck of sociology of science

Let me first dispose of a mistake frequently made about our original subfield by people who are not conversant with it—and that means, I am afraid, most of the world. The field of science studies is often presented as the extension of the same normal sociology of the social to a new object: scientific activities. After having studied religion, class struggles, politics, law, popular cultures, drug addiction, urbanism, corporate culture, etc., social scientists, so the story goes, had no reason to stop at what is the hallmark of contemporary societies: science and technology. According to this view, laboratories and research institutes were no more than the next items in a list of topics to be tackled by using the normal ingredients of social methodology that had been used elsewhere ‘with so much success’. This was the almost unanimous opinion—including that of our colleagues with whom, years ago, we started our enquiries and who are called ‘sociologists of scientific knowledge’ (SSK) or more vaguely ‘science and technology students’ (S&TS).[^117]

Had I to write an introduction to science studies, I would be glad to march behind such a flag.[^118] But since I am trying to define ANT, I have to show how it emerged out of sociology of science by drawing extreme conclusions not only for science but also for social theory. ANT is not the branch of social science that has succeeded in extending its methods to scientific activity and then to the rest of society, but the branch (or rather the twig) made of those who have been thoroughly shaken when trying to give a social explanation of the hard facts of science. ANT scholars are mainly defined as those who have drawn, from the thirty odd years of sociology of science, a completely different conclusion than those of their best and closest colleagues. Whereas the later have decided that social theory works even on science, we have concluded that, overall and in the details, social theory has failed on science so radically that it’s safe to postulate that it had always failed elsewhere as well. Social explanations cannot be ‘extended’ to science, thus they cannot expand anywhere else. If sociology claims to become somewhat of a science—and we do share this claim—it has to come to grasps with such an obstacle without flinching.

To check that this argument is not an empty paradox, I have to explain why we had to abandon our friends’ positions—without of course abandoning either close collaboration or friendship! In effect, four conclusions had been drawn from the development of sociology of science—I can ignore the fifth position, but I wonder whether it really even exists. It supposedly concluded that science is a ‘social fiction like all the other social fictions’ because it is obviously no longer interested in elaborating a social science and does not grasp the first thing about fiction anyhow.[^119] The first position is quite predictable: science studies had to fail completely because no social explanation of objective science can be offered; facts and theories are too hard, too technical, too real, too eternal, and too remote from human and social interest. Trying to explain science sociologically is a contradiction since, by definition, the scientific is only what has escaped from the narrow constraints of society—by which they probably mean ideology, political passions, subjective mood, and endless, empty debates. Scientific objectivity has to remain forever the rock on which all the ambitions of sociology will wreck, the stone that will always humiliate its pride. Such is the majority reaction of philosophers, epistemologists and, strangely enough, most social scientists: there can be a sociology of knowledge, of pseudo-sciences, of belief, of the superficial aspects of science— ‘scientists are humans, too’ says the cliche´—but not of the cognitive, objective, atemporal aspects of the incontrovertible results of science.[^120] Exeunt sociologists.

The second, less extreme conclusion can be stated in this way: in order to be respected and to succeed, sociology should stick to just those points deemed superficial by the former position. Indeed, sociology of science should limit itself to career patterns, institutions, ethics, public understanding, reward systems, legal disputes and it should propose only with great prudence to establish ‘some relations’ between some ‘cognitive’ factors and some ‘social’ dimensions, but without pressing the point too hard. Such is the position of a sociology of scientists (as opposed to a sociology of science) put forward, for instance, by Robert K. Merton and later Pierre Bourdieu.[^121]

The third conclusion is the one drawn by most of our colleagues in science studies: in their eyes, sociologists of the former persuasion are much too timid. As to those who have predicted with glee the failure of all scientific explanations of science, they have embraced a form of pure obscurantism. They were never able to offer a reason why science itself could not be scientifically studied.[^122] For scholars in SSK and more generally STS, cognitive and technical aspects of science, on the whole, are thoroughly studiable by sociologists. It requires invention, adaptation and precaution, but the usual tools of the trade are adequate enough—even though tricky questions of reflexivity and realismmightmakesomepeopledizzyandqueasy.[^123]Suchhasbecome,and with good reason, the common sense of sociologists of science.

But from the very same experiment we have drawn a completely different fourth conclusion—or rather the ‘we’ I use in this book is defined as those who have drawn the following consequences:[^124]

a) a thorough sociology of science is perfectly possible—against the philosophers of science and in agreement with the whole of science studies; b) such a sociology cannot be limited to the superficial and social context of science—against those who wish to limit the ambitions of their discipline to the study of scientists and who voluntarily shun away from the technical and cognitive content; c) scientific practice is too hard to be cracked by ordinary social theory and a new one has to be devised which can be used to throw a new light on ‘softer’ topics as well—against our colleagues in the field of science studies who chose not to see the threat to their original discipline raised by their own work.[^125]

I am not claiming that this conclusion to the thrilling adventure of science studies is the only necessary and inevitable one. I am simply saying that to be called ‘ANT scholars’ it is necessary to transform the failure of providing a convincing social explanation of scientific hard facts into a proof. It is not that sociology of science was doomed to fail, but that social theory instead had to be redone.[^126] Since there exist experimenta crucis (decisive experiments) neither in physics nor in sociology, I cannot demonstrate that this is the only way to go, but I can claim that by using this failure as a springboard—no social explanation of science is possible—a new path opens up for social theory: the social has never explained anything; the social has to be explained instead. It’s the very notion of a social explanation that has to be dealt with. Our colleagues prefer to say: ‘Social explanation of science has failed because it is contradictory.’ Or they might say: ‘It has succeeded fairly well, let’s go on with business as usual.’ But ANT proposes: ‘It’s a great opportunity now that it has failed so thoroughly since it may finally bring social theory to its senses.’ In the same way as church fathers celebrated Adam’s sin as a felix culpa (a fortunate fall from grace) because it had triggered Christ’s redemption, I could say that the failure of a social explanation on science has been the great chance for social theory.

If our decision to draw those conclusions from this experiment cannot be proven, it is nonetheless far from being frivolous, as if we had made it just for the fun of it, simply ‘pour e´pater le bourgeois’. There is an excellent reason, retrospectively at least, why the special case of science should have wrecked social theory so completely: it was the first time that social scientists were really studying up.

Until laboratories, machineries, and markets were carefully scrutinized, Objectivity, Efficacy and Profitability—the three Graces of modernism—were simply taken for granted. Social scientists had fallen into the dangerous habit of studying only those activities that differed from those default positions: irrationality should be accounted for; rationality was never in need of any additional justification; the straight path of reason did not require any social explanation, only its crooked deviations.[^127] Thus, no real test had ever been proposed to see whether a social explanation of anything actually held up or not, since rationality itself was never questioned. Even when they were tycoons, artistic geniuses, movie stars, boxing champions, or statesmen, sociologists’ informants were always branded by the stigma of being less rational, less objective, less reflexive, less scientific, or less academic than those doing the study. Thus, in spite of what they often claimed, sociologists had always studied down, since the power of science remained on their side and was not itself scrutinized. Religion, popular culture, mythical cosmologies, markets, corporations—even works of art—were never as strong as the science of the social, which was replacing all those softer things by the harder stuff of some hidden social aggregates as well as their powers, structure, and inertia. The wheels of the explanans had always been forged in more solid steel than those of the explanandum. No wonder they easily grinded out proofs and effortlessly cranked out data.

For example, religious people never screamed in anger when they were ‘socially explained’. Who would have listened to them anyway? If anything, their sobs would have been further proof that they could not stand witnessing their fanciful and archaic illusions explained by the cold glare of hard social facts. And the same would have happened if politicians, the poor, workers, farmers, and artists had whined at being ‘put into a social context’. Who would have listened to the three-century long string of objections raised by tropical worshippers accused of fetishism? They might have grumbled and shrugged, but never did they bite back at the sociologists’ proofs. So who would have checked the efficacy of social explanation? Certainly not critical sociologists, especially because their ‘explanations’ always fell on concerns they did not much care for. So not only did the social explanation never run into a counter case, but its acid also had no difficulty in dissolving issues for which social scientists could not care less about since, in their almost prophetic drive for emancipation, they tried to help people out of them! What event could have awaked them out of their dogmatic slumber? How about the gentle hum of laboratory air conditioning!

This is the Archimedean point social theory was looking for. . . . Science represented a completely different challenge and this is exactly the reason why we tackled it first—even though, for reasons of logic, I place it fourth in this book. Not only did social scientists care wholeheartedly about science, but it was also their only treasure left after the cruel disenchantment of modernism had struck down all the older ideals. Beyond objectivity, universality, and scientificity, there was nothing worth clinging to. Their only hope was to become fullfledged scientists. And yet, for the first time, social scientists had to study something that was higher, harder, and stronger than them. For the first time, the explanandum resisted and grinded the teeth of the explanans’ cogs to mere stumps. Not only that, but the screams of those being studied could be heard loud and clear—and they were not coming from Bali, the ghettos, TV studios, corporate board rooms, or the US Senate, but from departments next door, from colleagues in the very same hiring and grant committees.

Now, at last, it was time to carry out in the social sciences the experiment which had never been carried out before: What proof do we have that a social explanation holds when we study up? When the reactions of those studied cannot be ignored? When the ‘cultural capital’ of those studied is infinitely higher than those doing the study? When the objects to be replaced by ‘social force’ are obviously much stronger, varied, longer lasting than this very social force that is supposed to explain them? When the truths to be explained are equally valued by those who study and by those who are studied as the only treasure on earth worth fighting for? After two centuries of easily explaining away the behavior and beliefs of farmers, the poor, fetishists, fanatics, priests, lawyers, and businessmen whose anger was rarely registered and by providing explanations that could never be compared one to one with what was explained, we were going to finally see whether or not the social could explain anything else. Chemists, rocket scientists, and physicists are used to seeing their laboratories explode, but it had been quite a while before the sociologist’s office could run an experiment risky enough even to have a chance to fail! And, this time, it did explode. After a week in Roger Guillemin’s laboratory thirty years ago, I remember how inescapable I found the conclusion: the social cannot be substituted for the tiniest polypeptide, the smallest rock, the most innocuous electron, the tamest baboon. Objects of science may explain the social, not the other way around. No experience was more striking than what I saw with my own eyes: the social explanation had vanished into thin air.

Naturally, many branches of social science made the same effort, especially feminist studies, queer studies, some cultural studies and most of anthropology. But is it really unfair to say that those bodies of work risked remaining peripheral, marginal, and exotic as long as they were contrasted with scientific objectivity, which was supposed to escape from that sort of treatment? The service provided by science studies and similar branches of social science was to remove the standard that made them by comparison marginal or simply ‘special’. After science studies, every social science can study ‘up’.[^128]

No social explanation is necessary

The difficulty was to make sense of this experience—and this took a very long time. That scientists were sometimes angry at us was not in itself that significant. Studying up does not mean being submitted to the agenda of those we study: what some disgruntled scientists concluded from our research remains their business, not ours. As far as I can tell from the confusing episodes of what has been called the ‘Science Wars’, they might have concluded that the white purity of science should never be sullied by the dark and greasy fingers of mere sociologists.[^129] If they have not learned anything from their encounters with us, this is too bad for them and there is not much we can do. But even if they drew the wrong conclusion, their furor at what sociologists were so clearly missing in trying to explain their work was for me a crucial sign. No matter how misguided their reactions, it showed that whenever a social explanation was provided there was something very tricky going on. Instead of establishing some connection between two entities, it often happens that one entity is substituted by another one. At which point the necessary search for causality has become a wholly different enterprise dangerously close to prestidigitation.

How can this sleight of hand be done? It happens when a complex, unique, specific, varied, multiple, and original expression is replaced by a simple, banal, homogeneous, multipurpose term under the pretext that the latter may explain the former. For instance, when you try to relate the revolution in medicine introduced by Louis Pasteur to a small set of terms summarizing the French Second Empire; or when you try to account for Van Gogh’s Chambre a` Arles with a small number of all-purpose expressions having to do with artists’ markets. What begins as a classical and fully respectable search for an explanation ends up by replacing the explanandum with the explanans. While other sciences keep adding causes to phenomena, sociology might be the only one whose ‘causes’ risk having the strange effect of making the phenomena they are supposed to explain vanish altogether.

Such is the interpretation I chose to give to the ‘Science Wars’: scientists made us realize that there was not the slightest chance that the type of social forces we use as a cause could have objective facts as their effects.[^130] Not only because we lacked respect for them—in which case we could have ignored or even taken pride in debunking their pretensions[^131]—but because we could not detect any continuity between the causalities we were putting forward and the objects to which they were attached. Thanks to the scientists knee-jerk reactions, which could not be ignored because they dealt with harder facts than ours and occupied an academic position dangerously close to us, we slowly came to realize—provided we wished to—that such a slick substitution might have been occurring unnoticed in all the other subfields of social sciences as well, even when we were studying down and not up. In which case, it was not only science but the whole of social theory that had always provided harder objects than the social forces used to explain it—fetishes, beliefs, religions, cultures, art, law, markets. Even when no actor screamed back, no alarm ringed, the social scientists’ legislation seemed to run smoothly and to everyone’s satisfaction, celebrating still a new success for its ‘scientific method’.

ANT does not assert that all the other domains of social science are fine and that only science and technology require a special strategy because they are so much harder, so much more important, and so much more respectable. It claims that since social accounts have failed on science so pitifully, it must have failed everywhere, science being special only in the sense that its practitioners did not let sociologists pass through their turf and destroy their objects with ‘social explanations’ without voicing their dissent loud and clear. Elsewhere the ‘informants’ had always resisted but in a way that was not so noticeable because of their lower status or, when it was noticed, their furor was simply added to the data of the critical theorist as further proof that ‘naive actors’ cling to their pet illusions even in the face of the most blatant refutations. Scientists do not offer a special case of recalcitrance: we have simply rediscovered, thanks to science studies, that it should have remained the case everywhere, be it in the social or natural sciences.[^132] As we will see later on, our job as social scientists is to generate recalcitrant hard facts and passionate objectors that resist social explanations. In effect, sociologists have always studied up.[^133]

Could this lead to a science of the social after so many attempts to engage sociology ‘on the sure path of science’ as Kant had said? This remains to be seen. What is clear at this point is that science as an activity is part of the problem as well as part of the solution, and that no social science is now possible without a strong-minded sociology of science at its core to remove the snake of social explanation it has nurtured up to now. So far, what passes as ‘epistemology of social sciences’ has simply accumulated the defects built in the traditional conceptions of epistemology and sociology.

To use this point positively, and not simply as some example of how reflexive sociologists are sawing the branch on which they are uncomfortably seated, a little more work has to be done. The discovery—I see no reason to abstain from this rather grandiose word—that giving an explanation should not be confused with substituting a phenomenon for a social one has to be fully absorbed if we wish to continue our travels.

The difficulty resides with the word ‘substitution’. I know full well that even the most positivist sociologists of the social will naturally object that they never ‘really meant’ that when giving a social explanation of, let’s say, religious fervor, they ‘literally meant’ replacing statues, incense, tears, prayers, and pilgrimages by ‘some stuff’ like ‘social cohesion’ that would be hidden ‘beneath’ the clouds of smoke. They are not, they argue, that stupid. What they ‘really mean’ is that there must exist ‘behind’ the varieties of religious experience another deeper, stronger force that is ‘due to society’ and which explains why religious fervor holds ‘in spite of the fact’ that entities mobilized in prayers (gods, divinities) have no ‘real existence’. Similarly, since objects of art have no intrinsic properties, the passions they trigger must come from some other source that can account for the durable interest people invest in masterpieces.

So, sociologists don’t ‘really mean’ that a social force could be made visible ‘instead of’ gods and divinities or ‘in addition’ to works of art, only that this force is what gives them a durable existence in the absence of what actors say must be the solid and substantial flesh of their divinities and masterpieces. It should thus be noted that, contrary to what usually happens in natural sciences, the task of explaining starts only after a profound suspicion has been introduced about the very existence of the objects to be accounted for. Critical theorists would add that such a revelation of the social entity would be unbearable, since it would actually destroy the necessary illusion that makes society maintain its ‘veil of false consciousness’. So, in their account, social forces play the complicated role of being simultaneously what has to be postulated to explain everything and what, for many reasons, has to remain invisible. Those contradictory requirements are very reminiscent of the 19th century ether that had to be at once infinitely rigid and infinitely elastic. No wonder: like the ether of physicists, the social of sociologists is an artifact caused by the same lack of relativity in the description.

If they don’t literally replace some phenomenon by some social force, what do social explainers mean when they say that there is some force ‘behind the illusory appearances’ that constitutes the ‘real stuff’ out of which gods, arts, law, markets, psychology, and beliefs are ‘really’ made? What is an entity that plays the main part without doing anything? What sort of absence/presence is this? To me, this looks even more mysterious than the dogma of the Holy Trinity, and I am not reassured when it is this mystery that is supposed to explain the whole of religion, law, art, politics, economics, empires, or just plain everything—including the Holy Trinity! And I don’t find it fair at this time to hedge by claiming that sociology is not philosophy anyway; that theories are moot; that good social scientists have no time to split hairs; and that they are too busy with empirical questions or that the tasks of emancipation are too pressing. If sociology suddenly falls back onto an anti-intellectualist stance whenever things get delicate, why does it call itself a science?[^134]

It is exactly at such a juncture that we have to choose to be literal, naive, and myopic. Refusing to understand only half is sometimes a virtue. After all, physicists got rid of the ether only when one of them was moronic enough to ask how the small handle of a clock could be ‘superimposed’ on the big one: everyone else knew, he chose not to.[^135]

With all due respect, I propose to do the same with this great mystery of the social. Everyone seems to know what it means to ‘relate’ religion and society, law and society, art and society, market and society, to have something at once ‘behind’, ‘reinforced’, ‘invisible’, and ‘denied’. But I don’t!

With my voluntarily narrowed mind I’d say that if social element A is said to ‘cause’ the existence of B, C, and D, then not only should it be able to generate back B, C, and D, but it should also account for the differences between B, C, and D, except if it can be shown that B, C, and D are the same thing, in which case their differences can be declared unimportant. If you peruse the social history literature and look at the number of things that are supposed to be caused by ‘the force of society’, the rise of the modern state, the ascent of the petty bourgeoisie, the reproduction of social domination, the power of industrial lobbies, the invisible hand of the market, individual interactions, then the relation might just be one where a single cause has a million effects.[^136] But a cause is a cause is a cause. Is the causing element able to account for the differences between millions of effects—in which case can I generate B, C, and D as consequences when I hold A as a cause? Or are these differences between millions of events really immaterial—in which case sticking simply to cause A implies that I hold everything as important, minus marginal perturbations? In both cases, the A cause is indeed, for all practical purposes, substitutable with the millions of B, C, Ds, etc. But with the ‘ascent of the petty bourgeoisie’, do I really grasp what happened in England, France, and Germany from the 15th

to the 20th century? With the ‘automatic feedback of the invisible hand’, do I really grasp the millions of market interactions throughout the whole world? When holding the law of falling bodies, do I grasp everything pertinent there is to say about the planet’s interactions as well as in the pendulum movement of my mother’s old clock? Does ‘society’ or the ‘market’ contain in potentia what it is supposed to cause or not? ‘Of course not’ would respond the unanimous choir of social theorists, ‘we never claimed such a stupid philosophy of causes’. But then what exact role do they really give to ‘social forces’?

I am inventing of course an experiment that has never occurred because social observers never meant to test their causalities that harshly. They would easily grant that social gravitation is not like Newtonian gravitation. Forced to retreat, I guess they would say that they tried to imagine a more modest, fuzzy, and uncertain type of causality: ‘some relations’ and ‘correlations’ between different ‘factors’. But this is just the place not to be fuzzy: What is precisely the relation imagined between a social factor and some other phenomenon? This is where we have to use again the crucial distinction I introduced earlier between intermediary and mediator. Is the element B, whose emergence is triggered by a factor, treated as a mediator, or is it construed as an intermediary for some force simply transported intact through the agency of the ‘factor’? We have to be very practical again and as myopic as possible: we are not talking here about grandiose epistemological questions but about vehicles, movements, displacements, and transportation systems.[^137] We have to be as pigheaded as possible. If some ‘social factor’ is transported through intermediaries, then everything important is in the factor, not in the intermediaries. For all practical purposes, it can be substituted by them without any loss of the nuances. If society explains religion, then society is enough. If society explains law, then society is enough. If society explains science, then . . .

At this point, everything falls apart. Why? Because in this case, and only in this one, from the start it has been obvious to the enquirers as well as to the informants that ‘factors’ are unable to transport any action through any event reduced to the status of intermediary. Yes, Einstein had a turbulent youth and called his theory ‘revolutionary’ and ‘relativist’, but that does not lead you all the way through his use of Maxwell’s equations, only in their vicinity;[^138] yes, Pasteur was somewhat reactionary and adored the Empress Eugenie but that does not carry you very far through his bacteriology, even though ‘it might not be unrelated’ to his rejection, for instance, of spontaneous generation.[^139] When they have to transport social explanations to the sanctuary of science, factors have an unfortunate tendency to run out of gas! Naturally, this had always been true for the transportation of all the other entities to the various sanctuaries of law, religion, technology, markets, and subjectivities. But before science studies, it was never noticed how quickly they came to a full stop. The experiment that never took place in social theory about what is really meant by a social explanation of anything has been going on in our little field every day when papers are written about the history and sociology of the natural sciences. This is what has made science studies such a perfect crucible for the whole of sociology: finally, thanks to the attempts at socially explaining hard scientific facts, we are going to know what they all had meant before by ‘social’. Here is the place for the decisive big jump: Hic Rhodus, hic salta.

Translation vs. transportation

We have now reached the very birthplace of what has been called ‘actor-network-theory’ or, more accurately, ‘sociology of translation’—unfortunately the label never held in English. As I said, ANT is simply the realization that something unusual had happened in the history and sociology of scientific hard facts, something so unusual that social theory could no more go through it than a camel through the eye of a needle.

The Rubicon was crossed, for me at least, when successive connections were accepted of three former non-social objects (microbes, scallops, and reefs) that insisted on occupying the strange position of being associated with the former social entities we were trying to describe.[^140] Either they were rejected out of social theory because they did not look social enough, or they were welcomed into it. But then the very concept of social had to be deeply altered. This second solution was the defining moment of what was later called ANT.

For instance, fishermen, oceanographers, satellites, and scallops might have some relations with one another, relations of such a sort that they make others do unexpected things—this is the definition of a mediator, as we have now seen several times. Is there one element in this concatenation that can be designated as ‘social’? No. Neither the functioning of satellites nor the life habits of scallops would be clarified in any way by adding something social to the description. The social of sociologists thus appears exactly as it always was, namely a superfluity, a purely redundant rear-world adding nothing to the real world except artificial conundrums—just like the ether before relativity theory helped physicists to re-describe dynamics. Stage one: the social has vanished.

On the other hand, is there anything in the chain deployed that could be said to be non social, in the sense of pertaining to a world apart from associations, for instance a ‘material objective’ one, a ‘subjective symbolic’ one, or a realm of ‘pure thoughts’? No. Scallops make the fisherman do things just as nets placed in the ocean lure the scallops into attaching themselves to the nets and just as data collectors bring together fishermen and scallops in oceanography. From the first three uncertainties, we have learned that studying their relations might be empirically difficult but is no longer a priori forbidden by the ‘obvious objections’ that ‘things don’t talk’, ‘fish nets have no passion’, and ‘only humans have intentions’. Social is nowhere in particular as a thing among other things but may circulate everywhere as a movement connecting non-social things. Stage two: social is back as association.

We don’t know yet how all those actors are connected, but we can state as the new default position before the study starts that all the actors we are going to deploy might be associated in such a way that they make others do things. This is done not by transporting a force that would remain the same throughout as some sort of faithful intermediary, but by generating transformations manifested by the many unexpected events triggered in the other mediators that follow them along the line. This is what I dubbed the ‘principle of irreduction’ and such is the philosophical meaning of ANT: a concatenation of mediators does not trace the same connections and does not require the same type of explanations as a retinue of intermediaries transporting a cause.

When science studies writers set out to account for Einstein’s relativity, Pasteur’s bacteriology, Kelvin’s thermodynamics, and so on, they have to draw connections between entities that are completely different from what before was considered to be a string of social explanations. Those writers state that a factor is an actor in a concatenation of actors instead of a cause followed by a string of intermediaries. As soon as they do that, to their great surprise, the practical details of the case at hand seem to provide some explanation of the context that was supposed to explain it. Suddenly, it’s Pasteur’s own bacteria that appears to explain, through the new tracer of infectious diseases, a large part of what it meant, during the Second Empire in France, to be ‘socially connected’: contagious and uncontaminated people didn’t establish the same solidarity as, say, the rich and the poor. The direction of causality between what is to be explained and what provides an explanation is not simply reversed, but thoroughly subverted: the contagion redraws the social maps. The British Empire is not only ‘behind’ Lord Kelvin’s telegraph experiments, it is also given a reach, a faster reaction time, a durability it will never have without the tiny cables laid out on the ocean. Kelvin’s science creates, in part, the Empire, which is no longer in the background manipulating him unwittingly but made to exist by telegraph wires that are turned into full-blown mediators.[^141] It is this reversal in causality that ANT tried to register first for science and technology and then for every other topic.[^142] This is where it got the strange idea that the social was to be explained instead of providing the explanation. We all began to wonder: if we were good enough at describing so many mediators, we would realize that there is no need anymore for a society that lies ‘behind’.[^143]

As I have said in the introduction, to use the word social for such a process is legitimated by the oldest etymology of the word socius: ‘someone following someone else’, a ‘follower’, an ‘associate’. To designate this thing which is neither one actor among many nor a force behind all the actors transported through some of them but a connection that transports, so to speak, transformations, we use the word translation—the tricky word ‘network’ being defined in the next chapter as what is traced by those translations in the scholars’ accounts.[^144]

So, the word ‘translation’ now takes on a somewhat specialized meaning: a relation that does not transport causality but induces two mediators into coexisting. If some causality appears to be transported in a predictable and routine way, then it’s the proof that other mediators have been put in place to render such a displacement smooth and predictable (see Part II). I can now state the aim of this sociology of associations more precisely: there is no society, no social realm, and no social ties, but there exist translations between mediators that may generate traceable associations. Through this book, we will hopefully learn to widen the gap between an account that makes use of the social as traditionally construed and this other one that purports to deploy strings of mediators. To learn ANT is nothing more than to become sensitive to the differences in the literary, scientific, moral, political, and empirical dimensions of the two types of accounts.

There is more to experience than meets the eye

What may appear really shocking in such a definition of association is not only the strange new meaning it gives to ‘social’ but also the unusual place offered to so-called ‘natural’ objects. And yet both ends of these chains, the social and the natural, have to be dissolved simultaneously. This symmetry is rarely understood by those who define ANT as a sociology ‘extended to non-humans’—as if nonhumans themselves had not undergone a transformation as great as those of the social actors. And yet, if both are not put aside at the same time, it is in vain that we will do our fieldwork: whatever new connections we will have traced, some agencies will take up the label ‘social’ and others the label ‘natural’, and the incommensurability between the two will render invisible the drawing of what we mean by social connections. How they are associated will be lost for good: scallops will sink back into the deep ocean of natural, material, objective, and unintentional matters of fact, while fishermen will assemble in the shabby hut at the entrance of which is written, as in the bad old days of Apartheid, ‘for intentional humans only’. Meantime, sociologists will come back from the field empty-handed, all their data spoiled by a division that contradicts the very practice they tried to account for: fish and fishermen do not face one another like ‘natural’ and ‘social’, ‘object’ and ‘subject’, ‘material’ and ‘symbolic’—and oceanographers even less. Social theory does not have to be confused with Kantism.

To make this possible, we have to free the matters of fact from their reduction by ‘Nature’ exactly as much as we should liberate objects and things from their ‘explanation’ by society. Without this double move, our argument is nothing more than a return to classical materialism that closely resembles a ‘sociology of engineers’ complete with its ‘technical determinism’. The problem is that if it’s already difficult to show that the social is an artifact produced by the application of an ill-adapted notion of causality, it is even trickier to show that ‘Nature’, conceived as the gathering of all non-social matters of fact, should be dispensed with as well. And the utterly puzzled reactions to ANT over the years is proof enough that this is quite tricky and that the chances of success are indeed slim.

Durkheim against pragmatism No one offers a more striking proof of the close link between the definition of society and the theory of science than Durkheim when he set himself the task of criticizing pragmatism, then a novel philosophy. This is how he opened his first 1914 class:

So this is where the fourth source of uncertainty can help us. If we accept to learn also from the controversies about non-humans, we soon realize that matters of fact do not describe what sort of agencies are populating the world any better than the words ‘social’, ‘symbolic’, and ‘discursive’ describe what is a human actor and the aliens overtaking it. This is no wonder since ‘Society’ and ‘Nature’ do not describe domains of reality, but are two collectors that were invented together, largely for polemical reasons, in the 17th century.[^145] Empiricism, conceived as a clear-cut distinction between sensory impressions on the one hand and mental judgment on the other, cannot certainly claim to be a complete description of what ‘we should be attentive to in experience’.[^146]

To pursue our project we don’t have to tackle these difficult philosophical questions. We just need to be open-minded about the shape in which former objects of nature might present themselves in the new associations we are following. To our great surprise, once the artificial boundary between social and natural was removed, non-human entities were able to appear under an unexpected guise. For instance, rocks might be useful to knock an idealist back to his senses, but rocks in geology seemed to be much more varied, much more uncertain, much more open, and deploy many more types of agencies than the narrow role given to them in empiricist accounts.[^147] Steel desks offer a great opportunity for angry realists to thump the table in the name of ‘material constraints’ so as to bring sociologists back to reality, but laminated steel in metallurgy offers so many conundrums on the ways material resistance may occur that there is almost no relation between what positivist philosophers and material scientists call ‘matter’.[^148]

The inflexible drive of genetic make-up may be great for socio-biologists to ridicule the socialist dream of nurturing a better humanity, but genes in biogenetics take so many contradictory roles, obey so many opposite signals, are ‘made up’ of so many influences that if there is one thing that cannot be done with them it is to silence an adversary.[^149] Computers might offer an advertisement for the best example of hype, but chips in computer science require vast institutions in order to live up to their reputation as ‘formal machines’.[^150] Everywhere, the empirical multiplicity of former ‘natural’ agencies overflows the narrow boundary of matters of fact. There exists no direct relation between being real and being indisputable.[^151]

Empiricism no longer appears as the solid bedrock on which to build everything else, but as a very poor rendering of experience. This poverty, however, is not overcome by moving away from material experience, for instance to the ‘rich human subjectivity’, but closer to the The great chance of ANT is that objectivity’s many folds become visible as soon as one moves a bit closer to where agencies are made to express themselves, namely scientific laboratories—or where laboratories are brought into more intimate contact with daily life, which is quite often nowadays. Positivists were not very inspired when they chose ‘facts’ as their elementary building blocks to build their cathedral of certainty. They acted as if it was the most primitive, solid, incontrovertible, undisputable material, as if all the rest could be reduced to it. But there was more than one straw in the solid matter they chose as their foundation.[^152] The etymology itself should have made them shudder: How could a fact be that solid if it is also fabricated? As the shortest inquiry in the most primitive laboratory shows, and as Ludwik Fleck proved long ago, facts are about the least primitive, the most complex, the most elaborated, and the most collective makeup there is![^153]

Fleck on Wasserman’s reaction to detect syphilis In his pioneering book, the founder of sociology of science elaborates a much finer description of the ‘genesis’ of scientific fact that is usually recognized by those who read it through a Kantian or a Kuhnian lens:[^154] But his definition of social is clearly positive and non negative, that is, the more social there is, the more realism there is:

But the ambiguous notion of ‘thought collective’ is in no way akin to traditionally conceived social influence:

Thought collective is not what conditions or limits the fact production, but what allows it to emerge:

This realist attitude toward the social allows Fleck to shift from the notion of collective practice to that of the event:

The notion of event becomes the way to overcome the symmetric limits of sociologists and epistemologists: ANT is not interested only in freeing human actors from the prison of the social but in offering natural objects an occasion to escape the narrow cell given to matters of fact by the first empiricism.[^155] This is what I have always found so refreshing in science studies: until its development, the conversation between philosophers, sociologists, and political scientists about the right divide between ‘Nature’ and ‘Society’ had always been illustrated by boring, routine, millenary old matters of fact such as stones, rugs, mugs, and hammers that were basically things Neanderthals could have been using already. Those objects are perfectly respectable but, as we saw in the preceding chapter, they no longer leave a trace, and thus there is no way they could appear again as mediators.[^156]

The discussion begins to shift for good when one introduces not matters of fact, but what I now call matters of concern. While highly uncertain and loudly disputed, these real, objective, atypical and, above all, interesting agencies are taken not exactly as object but rather as gatherings.[^157] You cannot do with Monte Carlo calculations what you do with mugs; you cannot do with genetically modified organisms what you do with mats; you cannot do with quaternions what you do with black swans.[^158] This is exactly what the fourth uncertainty wishes to thrive from: the mapping of scientific controversies about matters of concern should allow us to renew from top to bottom the very scene of empiricism—and hence the divide between ‘natural’ and ‘social’. A natural world made up of matters of fact does not look quite the same as a world consisting of matters of concern and thus cannot be used so easily as a foil for the ‘symbolic-human-intentional’ social order. This is why what could be referred to as the second empiricism doesn’t look at all like the first: its science, its politics, its esthetics, its morality are all different from the past. It is still real and objective, but it is livelier, more talkative, active, pluralistic, and more mediated than the other.

There is, however, nothing radical or revolutionary in going from the first to the second empiricism. The shift from one world to the other did not require great ingenuity, courage, and originality from ANT scholars. Scientists and engineers in their laboratories were every day making the production of facts more visible, more risky, more costly, more debatable, more interesting, and more publicly relevant as even a cursory look at any technical magazine easily showed. Matters of fact may remain silent, they may allow themselves to be simply kicked and thumped at, but we are not going to run out of data about matters of concern as their traces are now found everywhere. If there is something disheartening for sociologists of associations, it is not the deep silence of a mute ‘Nature’ that would render their enquiries impossible and force them to stick to the ‘symbolic’ human realm, but the sheer flood of information on the many modes in which matters of concern exist in the contemporary world. How could we be up to the task and do justice to such a rising mass of evidence?

A list to help deploy matters of concern

The solution, once again, is to learn how to feed off uncertainties, instead of deciding in advance what the furniture of the world should look like. The inquiry can go on as long as we learn how to take the poison out of the concept of nature in the same way we did for the twin concept of society. In ‘society’ we learned to distinguish the associations—which we kept—from a substance made of social stuff—which we rejected. Similarly, in ‘nature’ we are going to keep the deployment of reality and reject its premature unification into matters of fact. If it was a mistake to jump from the idea of association to the conclusion that they are phenomena made of social stuff, it’s a symmetric error to conclude from an interest in non-humans that they will look like matters of facts—which are nothing more than a dumbed-down version of matters of concern as any reading in science studies will show.

For instance, spermatozoids used to be obstinate little machos swimming forcefully toward the powerless ovule; they are now attracted, enrolled, and seduced by an egg the agency of which is becoming so subtle now that it can select the good sperm from the bad—or at least this is what is now disputed in developmental physiology.[^159] Genes were supposed to transport information coding for the proteins, but they are also considered as competing with one another for food, thus ruining the information transfer metaphor—or at least this is what is now disputed among some geneticists.[^160] Chimpanzees were supposed to be nice sociable partners offering the image of a good savage paradise but now look fiercely competitive, prone to assassination and to devious Machiavellian plots—or at least this is what is disputed in primatology.[^161] Topsoil was supposed to be a compact set of inert matter arranged in layers of different colors that soil scientists learned how to map; it now swarms with such a great number of micro organisms that only microzoologists can explain this miniaturized jungle—or at least this is what is disputed among some pedologists.[^162]

Computers were supposed to be stupid digital machines but now appear to be achieving digitality through a bewildering set of material analog signals bearing no relation with formal calculations—or at least this is what is disputed among some theorists of computing.[^163]

Such a multiplicity does not mean that scientists don’t know what they are doing and that everything is just fiction, but rather that science studies has been able to pry apart exactly what the ready-made notion of ‘natural objective matters of fact’ had conflated too fast, namely reality, unity, and indisputability.[^164] When you look for the first, you do not get automatically the two others. And this has nothing to do with the ‘interpretive flexibility’ allowed by ‘multiple points of views’ taken on the ‘same’ thing. It is the thing itself that has been allowed to be deployed as multiple and thus allowed to be grasped through different viewpoints, before being possibly unified in some later stage depending on the abilities of the collective to unify them.[^165] There are simply more agencies in the pluriverse, to use William James’s expression, than philosophers and scientists thought possible.

The important ethical, scientific, and political point here is that when we shift from the world of matters of fact to the worlds of matters of concern, we can no longer be satisfied either by the indifference to reality that goes with multiple ‘symbolic’ representations of the ‘same’ nature or with the premature unification provided by ‘nature’. By including the many results of the sciences into the zoos of agencies at work together in the world, we have crossed another Rubicon, the one leading from metaphysics to ontology.[^166] If traditional social theory was against delving into the first, it is even more hesitant to sink into the second, which reminds it too much of its own philosophical infancy. And yet, if we wish to travel, we have to learn how to swim these turbulent waters.

To go from metaphysics to ontology is to raise again the question of what the real world is really like. As long as we remain in metaphysics, there is always the danger that deployment of the actors’ worlds will remain too easy because they could be taken as so many representations of what the world, in the singular, is like. In which case we would not have moved an inch and would be back at square one of social explanation—namely back to Kant’s idealism.

The danger cannot be exaggerated when we consider that the openmindedness shown, for instance, by anthropologists about the ‘other’s’ cosmologies is often due to their certainty that those representations have no serious relation to the solid world of matters of fact. In the scholar’s tolerance for wild beliefs, a great deal of condescension might seep through. There may be thousands of ways of imagining how kinships bring children into existence, but there is only, it is argued, one developmental physiology to explain how babies really grow in the womb. There may be thousands of ways to design a bridge and to decorate its surface, but only one way for gravity to exert its forces. The first multiplicity is the domain of social scientists; the second unity is the purview of natural scientists. Cultural relativism is made possible only by the solid absolutism of the natural sciences. Such is the default position of the endless debates going on, for instance, between physical and human geography, physical and cultural anthropology, biological psychiatry and psychoanalysis, material and social archaeology, and so on. There is unity and objectivity on one side, multiplicity and symbolic reality on the other.

This is just the solution that ANT wishes to render untenable. With such a divide between one reality and many interpretations, the continuity and commensurability of what we call the associations would immediately disappear, since the multiple will run its troubled historical course while the unified reality will remain intact, untouched, and remote from any human history. But it’s not the case that shifting from social to natural objects means shifting from a bewildering multiplicity to a welcoming unity. We have to shift, yes, but from an impoverished repertoire of intermediaries to a highly complex and highly controversial set of mediators. Controversies over ontologies turn out to be just as interesting and controversial as metaphysics, except that the question of truth (of what the world is really like) cannot be ignored with a blase´ pose or simplified a priori by thumping on desks and kicking at stones.[^167] Even once reality has fully set in, the question of its unity is still pending. The common world has still to be collected and composed. As we shall see at the end of this book, this is where the social sciences may regain the political relevance that they seem to have lost by abandoning the ether of the social and the automated use of the critical repertoire that it allowed. There is no rear-world behind to be used as a judge of this one, but in this lowly world there lie in wait many more worlds that may aspire to become one—or not, depending on the assembly work we will be able to achieve.

Fortunately, we don’t have to solve those arduous questions all at once in order to do our work as sociologists. We don’t even have to deploy the complete set of agencies manifested by matters of concern. We simply have to make sure that their diversity is not prematurely closed by one hegemonic version of one kind of matter of fact claiming to be what is present in experience—and that goes, of course, for ‘power’ and ‘Society’ as well as for ‘matter’ and ‘Nature’. Once again, the key training for practicing ANT is negative at first.

A to-do list will help us maintain the empirical grasp needed as the considerable difficulties of this theory might force us to lose our way.

First, the great advantage of following scientific facts is that as the name indicates they are fabricated, they exist in many different shapes and at very different stages of completion. While all these differences were shamelessly hidden when they were used as the ‘elementary building blocks’ of ‘the world’ in the singular, they provide massive amounts of information as soon as they are brought back into their ‘factories’, namely their laboratories and research institutes. Science studies now offers many devices to follow facts in the making and to multiply the sites where they have not yet become cold, routine matters of fact.

Second, those sites are no longer limited to laboratories. This is the great virtue of contemporary science and technology. It has extended itself so much, in so many settings, in ever closer intimacy with daily life and ordinary concerns, that it is hard to follow a course of action anywhere in industrial societies without bumping into one of their outcomes. The more science and technology extend, the more they render social ties physically traceable. A material infrastructure provides everyday more proof of a precise follow up of associations, as any look at the World Wide Web turned World Wide Lab shows.

Third, experiments and the controversies they generate provide a sort of continuous site to check what metaphysics and ontology could mean practically for scientists at work. The very organization of science—through grant application, large scale experiments, congresses, publications, controversies, consensus conferences—offers to the analyst a continuous source of information on how to raise the question of ontology. It is in the scientific institutions that we may find the easiest access to understand what it means to increase the range of agencies, to explore alternative theories of actions, without abandoning the quest for reality. Scientific practice is the drosophila of social theory since it offers an exaggerated and scaled up version of what can later be studied in much more inaccessible domains. Once you learn how to respect shifting ontologies, you can tackle more difficult entities for which the question of reality has been simply squeezed out of existence by the weight of social explanations.[^168] Compared to other domains, science is easier because the debates about the detours of objectivity are much more traceable.

Fourth, without any help from sociologists of science, the very difference between matters of fact and matters of concern has been made publicly visible by the growing intensity of controversies over ‘natural things’. The difference between reality and unity becomes palpable when courts have to decide on expert knowledge, when heads of state have to make decisions about natural phenomena, when consensus conferences are brought together to stabilize some geopolitical controversy, when scientists are criticizing their peers in the press for not having followed adequate protocols, when public discussions are going on about the fate of the Gulf Stream, etc. While before you had to go back and forth between reality and fiction as if it was the only road worth taking, it is now possible to distinguish the procedures allowing for realities—now in the plural—and those leading to stability and unity.[^169] To maximize the fabulous power of their etymology, objects have now become things again: the disputed topic of a virtual assembly.[^170] As should now be clear, what has limited inquiries so far is not the lack of traces nor the inherent technical difficulties of the task, but the conceptual obstacles rendering them a priori impossible. Even though these obstacles look formidable since they deal with the two main defects of social science—the concept of ‘social’ and the concept of ‘science’ —they might be no more than paper tigers once the fourth source of uncertainty has been added to the three others. What is sure is that the empirical domain that is opened is so vast, so rewarding, so varied that it is already hard to remember that it had been forbidden for so long to social scientists. If the third source of uncertainty allowed sociologists to catch up with ‘anatomically modern humans’, whose existence has been shared with artifacts for hundreds of thousands of years, it might be time, using the fourth, to catch up with a world made of matters of concern.

When we list the qualities of an ANT account, we will make sure that when agencies are introduced they are never presented simply as matters of fact but always as matters of concern, with their mode of fabrication and their stabilizing mechanisms clearly visible. In addition, we will be especially attentive to counteract the deconstruction mood by making sure that multiplicity is not associated with ‘interpretive flexibility’ or with a weakening of the empirical grasp. Finally, we will be attentive to the procedures through which the multiplicity of reality—metaphysics—can be distinguished from its progressive unification—ontology.

Alas, if it takes just a few hours to get rid of the obstacles of the sociology of the social (the time needed to read the previous chapters), then the harder part is before us. Just when conceptual obstacles have been removed, the real hurdles become visible: how to write an account that could live up to the prospects of the sociology of associations. That is the new difficulty—and hopefully the last one—we now have to tackle before starting our travels.

---

[^107]: A striking proof of the impact of science studies on social theory is provided by the parallel effect it had on Haraway. See Donna J. Haraway (1991), Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. Pickering’s critique of the earlier explanations provided by the Edinburgh school (Andy Pickering (1995), The Mangle of Practice. Time, Agency and Science) as well as Karin Knorr-Cetina’s definition of agencies in science (Karin Knorr-Cetina (1999), Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge). They all had to take a similar turn.

[^108]: This is of course Marx’s decisive insight and remains the crucial advantage of any historicization.

[^109]: See two totally different but equally remarkable examples in Tracy Kidder (1985), House (1985) and Rem Koolhas and Bruce Mau (1995), Small, Medium, Large, Extra-Large. No one should use the word ‘construction’ without reading first the ‘constructors’.

[^110]: See Albena Yaneva (2001), L’affluence des objets. Pragmatique compare´e de l’art contemporain et de l’artisanat’ and Albena Yaneva (2003), ‘When a Bus Meet a Museum. To Follow Artists, Curators and Workers in Art Installation’.

[^111]: Before the ‘anti-whiggish’ reactions in the history of science, it was impossible to share the libido sciendi of practitioners: faced with the final product, the public had no other way to get interested in science but the pedagogical injunction: ‘It’s true, so you should know about it.’

[^112]: The French epistemologist Gaston Bachelard has often insisted on this double etymology. For an English presentation see Mary Tiles and Robert B. Pippin (1984), Bachelard: Science and Objectivity.

[^113]: David Bloor (1991), Knowledge and Social Imagery.

[^114]: Bruno Latour (2003a), ‘The Promises of Constructivism’. I am following here in this chapter the clarifying work of Ian Hacking (1999), The Social Construction of What?

[^115]: Since, in the French tradition, constructivist and rationalist are synonymous, it was especially difficult for the French. The association of the word ‘construction’ with any suspicion about the reality of science crossed our ‘Duhemian’ (see Pierre Duhem (1904), La The´orie Physique. Son objet sa structure), ‘Bachelardian’, or ‘Canguilhemian’ mind only very slowly. See Georges Canguilhem (1968 [1988]), Ideology and Rationality in the History of the Life Sciences.

[^116]: The first critique has been offered during the ‘Science Wars’ episode, the second can be seen in Collins and Yearley ‘Epistemological Chicken’; Simon Schaffer (1991a), ‘The Eighteenth Brumaire of Bruno Latour’; and Steve Woolgar (1991), ‘The Turn to Technology in Social Studies of Science’.

[^117]: Although I have never used those labels, precisely because they maintain in existence the different domains that they have to dissolve, I have no problem in saying that ANT pertains to the fields of science, technology and society.

[^118]: There exist several ones. See Mario Biagioli (1999), The Science Studies Reader; Massimiano Bucchi (2004), Science in Society: An Introduction to the Social Studies of Science; and Dominique Vinck (1995), La sociologie des sciences.

[^119]: I have seen the accusation often but have never read anyone who had actually stated the argument. Disproving a non-existing position has nonetheless become

    somewhat of a cottage industry (see the book with the apt title by Noretta Koergte (1998), A House Built on Sand: Exposing Postmodernist Myths about Science). As usual the confusion between relativism (anything goes) and relativity is made at a price. As Deleuze said, ‘Relativism is not the relativity of truth but the truth of relation.’ Gille Deleuze (1993), The Fold: Leibnitz and the Baroque.

[^120]: This default position can be found in the cleverest version in Philip Kitcher (2003), Science, Truth, and Democracy as well as in the superficial Paul R. Gross, Norman Levitt and Martin W. Lewis (1997), The Flight from Science and Reason.

[^121]: R.K. Merton (1973), The Sociology of Science. Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. The rather crepuscular book written by Bourdieu to ‘explain’ the difference between his sociology of scientists and science studies bears witness to this distinction. See Pierre Bourdieu (2001), Science de la science et re´flexivite´.

[^122]: Bloor Knowledge and Social Imagery; Harry M. Collins and Trevor Pinch (1982), Frames of Meaning: the Social Construction of Extraordinary Science.

[^123]: See Steve Woolgar (1988), Science The Very Idea. Woolgar has done a remarkable job at trying to make his colleagues even dizzier, although he has always remained safely and wisely inside the strict limits given by the anthropocentric repertoire of discourse about objects of science and technology. He made sure that the gap between words and worlds became even wider, without noticing that science studies in addition to a lesson in irony could also be a lesson in realism.

[^124]: I would not attempt to define the real size of this incredibly small ‘we’, not being sure that it extends much beyond the 62 boulevard St Michel in Paris, and even that might be limited to the ground floor! I can only pretend to be a ‘representative sample’ of a non-existing group.

[^125]: The departure point is easy to locate in the two disputes with our SSK friends. See Collins and Yearley ‘Epistemological Chicken’. See our response in Callon and Latour, ‘Don’t throw the Baby out with the Bath School! A reply to Collins and Yearley’; see also David Bloor (1999), ‘Anti-Latour’ and my response in Bruno Latour (1999b), ‘For Bloor and Beyond - a Response to David Bloor’s ‘‘Anti-Latour’’’.

[^126]: This shibboleth could nicely dispense with reading much of what passes for ANTas this social theory has been put on its head and used as an all-purpose, all-terrain ‘methodology’, which can be ‘applied’ to any field without itself undergoing any change (see the Interlude p. 141). Conversely, masses of work in the history of science and technology could count as ANT.

[^127]: This remains the durable contribution of David Bloor’s principle of symmetry because it was the only way to break away from the stifling influence of sociology of knowledge that was limited to irrationalism.

[^128]: Such is the source of my chauvinist attachment for my beloved little subfield. From now on science, too, is ‘special’ instead of being that which makes all the other activities ‘special’.

[^129]: See Baudoin Jurdant (1998), Impostures intellectuelles. Les malentendus de l’affaire Sokal and Yves Jeanneret (1998), L’affaire Sokal ou la querelle des impostures.

[^130]: I am using ‘Science Wars’ to designate the entire reaction of scientists to the studies made of them even though it took about twenty years between the beginning of real hard core science studies and the bitter episodes triggered by the publications of ‘science warriors’.

[^131]: This is what has rendered making a critique so dangerous. The urge for debunking has become the best way to protect the analyst from even hearing the scream of those they misinterpret, while draping themselves in the role of courageous iconoclasts who alone ‘see through’ the mysteries to which ordinary people are naively attached. On this anthropology of iconoclasm, see Bruno Latour and Peter Weibel (2002), Iconoclash: Beyond the Image Wars in Science, Religion and Art.

[^132]: I would have never navigated this move without Isabelle Stengers (1997), Power and Invention and Stengers, The Invention of Modern Science. See an essay interpreting her argument in Bruno Latour (2004a), ‘How to Talk about the Body? The Normative Dimension of Science Studies’.

[^133]: Such was Harold Garfinkel’s crucial insight from the very beginning. And it is the right attitude of almost anyone else in the social sciences because in practice it’s very rare that good observers can stick to their social theory. This is what makes Pierre Bourdieu (1972), Outline of a Theory of Practice such an insightful book. This attitude of full respect is at the heart of the Chicago School of sociology and in all the work of Howie Becker. See Howard Becker (1982), Art Worlds.

[^134]: I thank Gerard de Vries for his help in those treacherous straits. If I drown, it’s not his fault.

[^135]: See Albert Einstein (1920), Relativity, the Special and the General Theory. For a staging of this rematerialization, see Peter Galison (2003), Einstein’s Clocks, Poincare´s’s Maps.

[^136]: This is just what social explainers find so convincing in their causality and what makes them so proud of their scientific achievements. It’s so powerful that it can explain so much! But they should look more carefully at the ways in which natural scientists establish connections between phenomena and their causalities. It usually means that the unknown can generate not only the known, but also probe deep into the future unknown. See the telling example in Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent (1986), ‘Mendeleev’s periodic system of chemical elements’.

[^137]: This obstinacy will pay itself back at the very end of this book when we will render possible the encounters with the beings that make action possible, encounters that have been so far delayed by the ill-timed assemblage of the collective in the form of a society—see p. 232.

[^138]: A classical example of such an explanation is offered in Lewis S. Feuer (1974), Einstein and the Generations of Science.

[^139]: See the typical case presented in John Farley and Gerald L. Geison (1974), ‘Science, Politics and Spontaneous generation in 19th-century France: the Pasteur-Pouchet Debate’ and Gerald G. Geison (1995), The Private Science of Louis Pasteur.

[^140]: See Bruno Latour (1984), Les microbes, guerre et paix, suivi de Irre´ductions; John Law (1986b), ‘On the Methods of Long-Distance Control Vessels Navigation and the Portuguese Route to India’; and of course the now mythical paper on scallops Michel Callon (1986), ‘Some elements of a sociology of translation domestication of the scallops and the fishermen of St Brieux Bay’ that I here summarize in this section.

[^141]: See Crosbie Smith and Norton Wise (1989), Energy and Empire: A Biographical Study of Lord Kelvin and Brian Cantwell Smith (2003), ‘The Devil in the Digital Details. Digital Abstraction and Concrete Reality’.

[^142]: Once again, everyone else in history, anthropology, art history, and business history had been doing the same all along. See the stunning example in Carlo Ginzburg (1980), The Cheese and the Worms: The Cosmos of a 16th-Century Miller for the way to respect the metaphysics of a miller. See Alfred D. Chandler (1977), The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business for an account of the growth of companies that does not presuppose scale.

[^143]: Had we known Gabriel Tarde earlier, we would have saved a lot of effort or at least would not have had to indulge in the rather silly posture that we had invented a brand new social theory.

[^144]: Callon refers explicitly to Michel Serres (1974), La Traduction (Herme`s III).

    ‘We are currently witnessing an attack on reason which is truly militant and determined. Consequently the problem is of threefold importance. 1) In the first place, it is of general importance. Pragmatism is in a better position than any other doctrine to make us see the need for a reform of traditional rationalism, for it shows us what is lacking in it. 2) Next, it is of national importance. Our whole French culture is basically and essentially a rationalist one. The 18th century is a prolongation of Cartesianism. A total negation of rationalism would thus constitute a danger, for it would overthrow our whole national culture. If we had to accept the form of irrationalism represented by pragmatism, the whole French mind would have to be radically changed. 3) Lastly, it is of philosophical importance. Not only our culture, but the entire philosophical tradition, right from the very beginnings of philosophical speculation is inspired by rationalism. If pragmatism were valid, we should have to embark upon a complete reversal of this whole tradition.’ (Durkheim 1955)

[^145]: On this long history I can only refer the reader to Steven Shapin and Simon Schaffer (1985), Leviathan and the Air-Pump: Hobbes, Boyle and the Experimental Life. The link between sociology and modernization is so strong that it’s impossible to disentangle one from the other. See Ulrick Beck, Anthony Giddens and Scott Lash (1994), Reflexive Modernization: Politics, Tradition and Aesthetics in the Modern Social Order; Zygmunt Bauman (1997), Postmodernity and its Discontents; and Bruno Karsenti (1997), L’Homme total: Sociologie, anthropologie et philosophie chez Marcel Mauss.

[^146]: This is Whitehead’s expression. See William James (1890), The Principles of Psychology, John Dewey (1930 reprinted in 1948 complete works 1982), Reconstruction in Philosophy, and Stengers Penser avec Whitehead. That empiricism has never been simply about matters of fact is marvellously shown in Lorraine Daston (1988), ‘The Factual Sensibility: an Essay Review on Artifact and Experiment’ and Jessica Riskin (2002), Science in the Age of Sensibility: The Sentimental Empiricists of The French Enlightenment.

[^147]: See the chapter on rocks in Hacking, The Social Construction of What?

[^148]: See Pablo Jensen (2001), Entrer en matie`re: Les atomes expliquent-ils le monde?

[^149]: See Evelyn Fox-Keller (2000), The Century of the Gene; Sophie Houdart (2000), ‘Et le scientifique tint le monde: Ethnologie d’un laboratoire japonais de ge´ne´tique du comportement’; and Richard Lewontin (2000), The Triple Helix: Gene, Organism and Environment.

[^150]: Brian Cantwell Smith (1997), On the Origins of Objects.

    ‘To give an accurate historical account of a scientific discipline is impossible. It is as if we wanted to record in writing the natural course of an excited conversation among several persons all speaking simultaneously among themselves and each clamoring to make himself heard, yet which nevertheless permitted a consensus to crystallize.’ (Fleck 1981: 15)

[^151]: The unlikely case of sugar beets has helped Franc¸ois Me´lard to provide one of the best applications of what happens to society when things are brought in. See Franc¸ois Me´lard (2001) ‘L’autorite´ des instruments dans la production du lien social: le cas de l’analyse polarime´trique dans l’industrie sucrie`re belge’.

[^152]: Durkheim had not much chance either when he proposed to treat ‘social facts as things’, since what is social, what is a fact, and what is a thing are probably the three most controversial, uncertain, and shaky concepts of philosophy!

[^153]: See Ludwig Fleck (1981) Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact and Ludwik Fleck, Robert S. Cohen and Thomas Schnelle (1986) Cognition and Fact: Materials on Ludwik Fleck.

[^154]: The metaphor of lens or presupposition is actually the one used by Kuhn in his foreword to Fleck’s book.

    ‘Every epistemological theory is trivial that does not take this sociological dependence of all cognition into account in a fundamental and detailed manner. But those who consider social dependence a necessary evil and unfortunate human inadequacy which ought to be overcome fail to realize that without social conditioning no cognition is even possible. Indeed, the very word ‘‘cognition’’ acquires meaning only in connection with a thought collective.’ (Fleck 1981: 43)

    This is what makes him at odds with sociologists like Durkheim: ‘All these thinkers trained in sociology and classics, however, no matter how productive their ideas, commit a characteristic error. They exhibit an excessive respect, bordering on pious reverence for scientific facts’. (Fleck 1981: 47)

    ‘If we define ‘‘thought collective’’ as a community of persons mutually exchanging ideas or maintaining cultural interaction, we will find by implication that it also provides the special ‘‘carrier’’ for the historical development of any field of thought, as well as for the given stock of knowledge and level of culture. This we have designated thought style. The thought collective thus supplies the missing component’. (Fleck 1981: 39)

    ‘This is how a fact arises. At first there is a signal of resistance in the chaotic initial thinking, then a definite thought constraint, and finally a form to be directly perceived. A fact always occurs in the context of the history of thought and is always the result of a definite thought style’. (Fleck 1981: 95)

    ‘We can summarize as follows our theory of the recognition of the relation between the Wassermann reaction and syphilis. The discovery—or the invention—of the Wasserman reaction occurred during a unique historical process, which can be neither reproduced by experiment nor confirmed by logic. The reaction was worked out, in spite of many errors, through sociopsychological motives and a kind of collective experience. From this point of view the relation between the Wassermann reaction and syphilis-an undoubted fact-becomes an event in the history of thought’. (Fleck 1981: 97)

    ‘Truth is not ‘‘relative’’ and certainly not ‘‘subjective’’ in the popular sense of the word. It is always, or almost always, completely determined within a thought style. One can never say that the same thought is true for

    A and false for B. If A and B belong to the same thought collective, the thought will be either true or false for both. But if they belong to different thought collectives, it will just not be the same thought! It must either be unclear to, or be understood differently by, one of them. Truth is not a convention but rather (1) in historical perspective, an event in the history of thought, (2) in its contemporary context, stylized thought constraint’. (Fleck 1981: 100)

[^155]: Latour, Politics of Nature, Chapter 2.

[^156]: Except of course in the expert hands of archaeologists and ethnographers. See Pierre Lemonnier, Technological Choices.

[^157]: Martin Heidegger (1977), The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. On the rereading of this argument, see Graham Harman (2002), Tool-Being: Heidegger and the Metaphysics of Objects.

[^158]: See Peter Galison (1997), Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics and Pickering The Mangle of Practice.

[^159]: See the chapter in Shirley Strum and Linda Fedigan (2000), Primate Encounters by Tang-Martinez, Z. ‘Paradigms and Primates: Bateman’s Principles, Passive Females, and Prospectives from Other Taxa. pp. 260–274.

[^160]: See Jean-Jacques Kupiec and Pierre Sonigo (2000), Ni Dieu ni ge`ne.

[^161]: See Frans De Waal (1982), Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex Among Apes.

[^162]: See Alain Ruellan and Mireille Dosso (1993), Regards sur le sol.

[^163]: See Adam Lowe and Simon Schaffer (1999), N01se.

[^164]: This is the decisive lesson I draw from Marc Berg and Anne-Marie Mol (1998), Differences in Medicine: Unraveling Practices, Techniques and Bodies and Mol, The Body Multiple.

[^165]: This is also the dividing line between postmodernism, which believes that its task is to add multiplicity to a world overly unified by ‘master Narratives’, and ANT which feels that multiplicity is a property of things, not of humans interpreting things.

[^166]: I made no pretence to follow standard definitions, given the long and variable history of those words. In what follows, ‘ontology’ is the same thing as ‘metaphysics’, to which the question of truth and unification have been added.

[^167]: I maintain the plural for ontologies to remind the reader that this unity is not the result of what the world is like at first encounter, but what the world might become provided it’s collected and assembled.

[^168]: A useful case of this is offered by a study of religion that takes the Catholic God as an instance of actor-network. See Albert Piette (1999), La religion de pre`s: L’activite´ religieuse en train de se faire.

[^169]: See Callon, Lascoumes and Barthe, Agir dans un monde incertain.

[^170]: See Latour and Weibel, Making Things Public.
