# Fifth Source of Uncertainty: Writing Down Risky Accounts

_Source pages: 132–151_

This introduction to ANT begins to look like another instance of Zeno’s paradox, as if every segment was split up by a host of mediators each claiming to be taken into account. ‘We will never get there! How can we absorb so many controversies?’ Having reached this point, the temptation is great to quit in despair and to fall back on more reasonable social theories that would prove their stolid common sense by ignoring most of the sources of uncertainty I have reviewed. We could swallow one, maybe two, but not four in a row. Unfortunately, I have not found a way to speed things up: this type of science for that type of social should be as slow as the multiplicity of objections and objects it has to register in its path; it should be as costly as it is necessary to establish connections among the many mediators it finds swarming at every step; and it should be as reflexive, articulated, and idiosyncratic as the actors cooperating in its elaboration. It has to be able to register differences, to absorb multiplicity, to be remade for each new case at hand. This is why the four sources of uncertainty have to be tackled courageously all at once, each adding its set of differences to the others. If one is missing, the whole project falls apart.

But I confess the difficulty: Is it not counterproductive in the end to abandon the convenient shorthand of social explanations, to split hairs indefinitely about what is or is not a group, to trick intermediaries into behaving as mediators, to register the queerest idiosyncrasies of the humblest actors, to set up long lists of objects participating in action, and to drop the background made of solid matters of fact for the foreground of shifty matters of concern? How ridiculous is it to claim that inquirers should ‘follow the actors themselves’, when the actors to be followed swarm in all directions like a bee’s nest disturbed by a wayward child? Which actor should be chosen? Which one should be followed and for how long? And if each actor is made of another bee’s nest swarming in all directions and it goes on indefinitely, then when the hell are we supposed to stop? If there is something especially stupid, it is a method that prides itself in being so meticulous, so radical, so all encompassing, and so object-oriented as to be totally impractical. This is not a sociology any more but a slowciology! Zen masters can puzzle over the many conundrums of their austere discipline, but not the writer of a sociology treatise. Either she proposes a project that is affordable and manageable or we sue her for disinformation.

We write texts, we don’t look through some

window pane

Fortunately, there is a solution out of these many difficulties and, like all the solutions I have given so far, it is a very practical one: only by sticking obstinately to our decision to feed off uncertainties can we eventually get back on our feet. If we want to have a chance to mop up all the controversies already mentioned, we have to add a fifth and last source of uncertainty, namely one about the study itself. The idea is simply to bring into the foreground the very making of reports. As the reader should have understood by now, the solution to relativism is always more relativity. All things being equal, we should do for our study what Einstein did when he decided to tackle—instead of the sublime questions of ether—the apparently moronic and mundane questions of how anyone equipped with a rod and a clock could catch any signal from someone else equipped with a rod and a clock. What is requested from us is not the impossible task of jumping, in one salto mortale, from our mental representation to the four former sources of uncertainty, but to ask the simple question: What do we do when we trace social connections? Are we not, in effect, writing down accounts?

What is an account?[^171] It is typically a text, a small ream of paper a few millimeters thick that is darkened by a laser beam. It may contain 10,000 words and be read by very few people, often only a dozen or a few hundred if we are really fortunate. A 50,000 word thesis might be read by half a dozen people (if you are lucky, even your PhD advisor would have read parts of it!) and when I say ‘read’, it does not mean ‘understood’, ‘put to use’, ‘acknowledged’, but rather ‘perused’, ‘glanced at’, ‘alluded to’, ‘quoted’, ‘shelved somewhere in a pile’. At best, we add an account to all those which are simultaneously launched in the domain we have been studying. Of course, this study is never complete. We start in the middle of things, in medias res, pressed by our colleagues, pushed by fellowships, starved for money, strangled by deadlines. And most of the things we have been studying, we have ignored or misunderstood. Action had already started; it will continue when we will no longer be around. What we are doing in the field—conducting interviews, passing out questionnaires, taking notes and pictures, shooting films, leafing through the documentation, clumsily loafing around—is unclear to the people with whom we have shared no more than a fleeting moment. What the clients (research centers, state agencies, company boards, NGOs) who have sent us there expect from us remains cloaked in mystery, so circuitous was the road that led to the choice of this investigator, this topic, this method, this site. Even when we are in the midst of things, with our eyes and ears on the lookout, we miss most of what has happened. We are told the day after that crucial events have taken place, just next door, just a minute before, just when we had left exhausted with our tape recorder mute because of some battery failure. Even if we work diligently, things don’t get better because, after a few months, we are sunk in a flood of data, reports, transcripts, tables, statistics, and articles. How does one make sense of this mess as it piles up on our desks and fills countless disks with data? Sadly, it often remains to be written and is usually delayed. It rots there as advisors, sponsors, and clients are shouting at you and lovers, spouses, and kids are angry at you while you rummage about in this dark sludge of data to bring light to the world. And when you begin to write in earnest, finally pleased with yourself, you have to sacrifice vast amounts of data that cannot fit in the small number of pages allotted to you. How frustrating this whole business of studying is.

And yet, is this not the way of all flesh? No matter how grandiose the perspective, no matter how scientific the outlook, no matter how tough the requirements, no matter how astute the advisor, the result of the inquiry—in 99% of the cases—will be a report prepared under immense duress on a topic requested by some colleagues for reasons that will remain for the most part unexplained.[^172] And that is excellent because there is no better way. Methodological treatises might dream of another world: a book on ANT, written by ants for other ants, has no other aim than to help dig tiny galleries in this dusty and earthly one.

Bringing the writing of reports into the foreground might irritate those who claim to know what the social is made of. They would much prefer to be like ‘hard’ scientists and try to understand the existence of a given phenomenon, refusing to consider the written account and relying instead on direct contact with the thing at hand via the transparent medium of a clear and unambiguous technical idiom. But we, who have been trained in science studies, don’t need to ignore the thickness of any given text, its pitfalls, its dangers, its awful way to make you say things you don’t want to say, its opacity, its resistance, its mutability, its tropism. We know too well that, even in ‘hard’ sciences, authors clumsily try to write texts about difficult matters of concern. There is no plausible reason why our texts would be more transparent and unmediated than the reports coming out of their laboratories.[^173]

Since we are all aware that fabrication and artificiality are not the opposite of truth and objectivity, we have no hesitation in highlighting the text itself as a mediator. But for this very same reason, we don’t have to abandon the traditional goal of reaching objectivity simply because we consider with great care the heavy textual machinery. Our texts, like those of our fellow scientists, run the parallel course of being artificial and accurate: all the more accurate because they are artificial. But our texts, like those of our fellow scientists, run the risk of being simply artificial, that is full of artifacts. The difference is not between those who know for certain and those who write texts, between ‘scientific’ and ‘literary’ minds, between ‘esprit de ge´ome´trie’ and ‘esprit de finesse’, but between those who write bad texts and those who write good ones.[^174] One must put forth the following questions: What is a good laboratory and what is a good textual account? The latter question, far from being belated and irrelevant, becomes central to the definition of what is for us a science of the social. To put it in the most provocative way: good sociology has to be well written; if not, the social doesn’t appear through it.

The question is not whether to place objective texts in opposition to subjective ones. There are texts that pretend to be objective because they claim to imitate what they believe to be the secret of the natural sciences; and there are those that try to be objective because they track objects which are given a chance to object to what is said about them. It’s because ANT claims to renew what it means to be a science and what it means to be social, that it has also to renew what it is an objective account. The word does not refer to the traditional sense of matters of fact—with their cold, disinterested claims to ‘objectification’—but to the warm, interested, controversial building sites of matters of concern. Objectivity can thus be obtained either by an objectivist style—even though no object is there to be seen—or by the presence of many objectors— even though there is no pretence for parodying the objectivist genre.

It’s thus a fair question to ask why the literature of social science is often so badly written. There are two reasons for this: first, scholars strive to imitate the sloppy writings of hard scientists; second, because contrary to the latter, they do not convoke in their reports actors recalcitrant enough to interfere with the bad writing.

No matter how illiterate they pretend to be, natural scientists will be forced to take into account at least some of the many quirks of their recalcitrant objects. On the other hand, it seems that only sociologists of the social—especially critical sociologists—can manage to efficiently muffle their informants’ precise vocabulary into their own all-purpose meta-language. Even though natural scientists take great pains to be as boring as possible, matters of concern inundate scientific writings in such a way as to make physics, biology, and natural history papers the most fascinating of operas—as literary students of science have shown so forcefully.[^175] But social scientists too often succeed, at great cost, in being boring for good! This might be the only real difference between the ‘hard’ and the ‘soft’ sciences: you can never stifle the voice of non-humans but you can do it to humans. People have to be treated much more delicately than objects because their many objections are harder to register. Whereas subjects easily behave like matters of fact, material objects never do.[^176] This is why the question of what is a good account is so much more crucial for the social than for the natural sciences. To introduce the words ‘textual account’ into a discourse on method might be like dynamite, but not because it blows apart the claims of scientists to objectivity. Rather, it destroys forever sociologists’ entitlement to sloppy writing under the pretext that they have to write ‘like’ scientists. Because science students had many occasions to probe the slow emergence of objectivity in scientific writings, they were delivered from the burden of trying to wear the false attires of the objectivist prose.[^177] Because they were not living under the shadow of a borrowed objectivity, they could explore other ways to make the object resist in their textual accounts.

Foregoing the word ‘textual’ in textual accounts remains dangerous however because, for people unaware of science studies and of semiotics, texts are often construed as ‘stories’ or, even worse, as ‘just stories’. Against such a blase´ attitude, I will be using the expression ‘textual account’ to mean a text for which the question of its accuracy and truthfulness has not been put aside.[^178] And yet the temptation to confuse the two is all the greater because there are scholars—if this honorable word can be applied to them—who claim that the social sciences generate ‘only’ narratives, and they sometimes add: ‘just like fiction’.[^179] Like footballers scoring a goal against their own team, sophisticated humanists have begun to use the words ‘narratives’ and ‘discourses’ as a way to say that there are no truthful scriptures. As if the absence of an absolute Text meant that all the texts were relative. Of course, all those who are ready to denigrate the social sciences have applauded in agreement since that is just what they have been saying all along: ‘Sociologists are mere storytellers. It’s about time some of them confess it at last.’ If it is one thing to say that social sciences produce written accounts—every science on earth does the same and this is why they all end with the –logy or –graphy suffixes—it’s quite another to conclude from this trite that we can only write fiction stories.

First, such an appreciation betrays a remarkable ignorance of the hard work of fiction writers. Those in anthropology, sociology, cultural studies—who pride themselves on ‘writing fictional narratives’— should be inspired in being at least as disciplined, as enslaved by reality, as obsessed by textual quality, as good writers can be. They don’t realize that if social science was ‘fiction anyway’, it would have to submit to an ordeal that would be even more discriminating than what they imagine to be those of experimental science. You can object by asking ‘What is a good writer?’ But I will answer: ‘What is a good scientist?’ There is no general answer to these two questions.

But more importantly, an account which accepts to be ‘just a story’ is an account that has lost its main source of uncertainty: it does not fret any longer at being accurate, faithful, interesting, or objective. It has forsaken the project of translating the four sources of uncertainty that we have reviewed so far. And yet, no social scientist can call oneself a scientist and abandon the risk of writing a true and complete report about the topic at hand. It’s not because you become attentive to the writing that you have to shed the quest for truth. Conversely, it’s not because a text is bland and boring, that it is accurate. Too often, social scientists believe that an ‘objective style’, by which they usually mean a few grammatical tricks like the passive form, the royal ‘we’, and lots of footnotes, will miraculously disguise the absence of objects. The thick sauce of ‘objective style’ cannot hide for long the lack of meat. But if you have the meat, you may add an extra condiment or dispense with it.

Textual accounts are the social scientist’s laboratory and if laboratory practice is any guide, it’s because of the artificial nature of the place that objectivity might be achieved on conditions that artifacts be detected by a continuous and obsessive attention. So, to treat a report of social science as a textual account is not a weakening of its claims to reality, but an extension of the number of precautions that have to be taken onboard and of the skills requested from the enquirers. As it should be clear by now, rendering the production of objectivity more difficult is the name of the game. There is no reason why sociologists of association should abandon that constraint when they abandon the sociology of the social and when they add to the discussion a fifth source of uncertainty, this one generated by the writing of their own studies. In fact, it is quite the opposite. If the social is something that circulates in a certain way, and not a world beyond to be accessed by the disinterested gaze of some ultra-lucid scientist, then it may be passed along by many devices adapted to the task—including texts, reports, accounts, and tracers. It may or it may not. Textual accounts can fail like experiments often do.[^180]

By contrast, it seems that too often sociologists of the social are simply trying to ‘fix a world on paper’ as if this activity was never in risk of failing. If that is the case, there is no way they can succeed, since the world they wish to capture remains invisible because the mediating constraints of writing are either ignored or denied. No matter what pains they have taken to be accurate during the course of their inquiries, their textual account has been missed. Sociologists of association try an experiment altogether different: Can the materiality of a report on paper, a story, or rather a fiction—there is no need to abstain from a word that is so close to the fabrication of facts—extend the exploration of the social connections a little bit further? The careers of mediators should be pursued all the way to the final report because a chain is only as weak as its weakest link. If the social is a trace, then it can be retraced; if it’s an assembly then it can be reassembled. While there exists no material continuity between the society of the sociologist and any textual account—hence the wringing of hands about method, truth, and political relevance—there might exist a plausible continuity between what the social, in our sense of the word, does and what a text may achieve—a good text, that is.

Defining at last what a network is

But what is a good text? We are not concerned here by good style because no matter how well we learn to write, we will always remain, alas, mere social scientists and we will never be able to do more than emulate from far away the skills of writers, poets, playwrights, and novelists. For this reason, we need a less sophisticated shibboleth. Surprisingly, it’s the search for just such a touchstone that will help us define at last the most confusing of the words used in our alternative social theory. I would define a good account as one that traces a network.

I mean by this word a string of actions where each participant is treated as a full-blown mediator. To put it very simply: A good ANT account is a narrative or a description or a proposition where all the actors do something and don’t just sit there. Instead of simply transporting effects without transforming them, each of the points in the text may become a bifurcation, an event, or the origin of a new translation. As soon as actors are treated not as intermediaries but as mediators, they render the movement of the social visible to the reader. Thus, through many textual inventions, the social may become again a circulating entity that is no longer composed of the stale assemblage of what passed earlier as being part of society.[^181] A text, in our definition of social science, is thus a test on how many actors the writer is able to treat as mediators and how far he or she is able to achieve the social.

Thus, the network does not designate a thing out there that would have roughly the shape of interconnected points, much like a telephone, a freeway, or a sewage ‘network’. It is nothing more than an indicator of the quality of a text about the topics at hand.[^182] It qualifies its objectivity, that is, the ability of each actor to make other actors do unexpected things. A good text elicits networks of actors when it allows the writer to trace a set of relations defined as so many translations.

A terminological precision about network The word network is so ambiguous that we should have abandoned it long ago. And yet the tradition in which we use it remains distinct in spite of its possible confusion with two other lines. One is of course the technical networks—electricity, trains, sewages, internet, and so on. The second one is used, in sociology of organization, to introduce a difference between organizations, markets, and states (Boyer 2004). In this case, network represents one informal way of associating together human agents (Granovetter 1985).

When (Castells 2000) uses the term, the two meanings merge since network becomes a privileged mode of organization thanks to the very extension of information technology. It’s also in this sense that Boltanski and Chiapello (2005) take it to define a new trend in the capitalist mode of production.

But the other tradition, to which we have always referred, is that of Diderot especially in his Le reˆve de d’Alembert (1769), which includes twenty-seven instances of the word re´seaux. This is where you can find a very special brand of active and distributed materialism of which Deleuze, through Bergson, is the most recent representative.[^183] Here is one example: It’s clear from this quote that re´seau has nothing to do with the social as normally construed, nor is it limited to human ties. But it’s certainly close to Tarde’s definition of ‘society’ and ‘imitative rays’ (Karsenti 2002).

So how can we define by contrast a bad textual account? In a bad text only a handful of actors will be designated as the causes of all the others, which will have no other function than to serve as a backdrop or relay for the flows of causal efficacy. They may go through the gestures to keep busy as characters, but they will be without a part in the plot, meaning they will not act. Nothing is translated from one to the other since action is simply carried through them. Remember that if an actor makes no difference, it’s not an actor. The report has not been produced in an ad hoc fashion to be uniquely adequate to the description of specific actors and for the eyes of specific readers.[^184] It is standard, anonymous, across the board; nothing happens in it. There are just repeat cliche´s of what has been assembled before as the social past. It has watered down translations into mere displacements without transformation. It simply transports causalities through mere intermediaries.

This is where the literary contrast between ANT and sociology of the social—and even more so with critical sociology—is the greatest. What is often called a powerful and convincing account, because it is made of a few global causes generating a mass of effects, ANT will take as a weak and powerless account that simply repeats and tries to transport an already composed social force without reopening what it is made of and without finding the extra vehicles necessary to extend it further. Masses of social agents might have been invoked in the text, but since the principle of their assembly remains unknown and the cost of their expansion has not been paid, it’s as if nothing was happening. No matter what their figuration is, they don’t do very much. Since the reassembling of new aggregates has not been rendered traceable through the text, it’s as if the social world had not been made to exist. Although the common definition of the social seems to be everywhere in full view, our definition of what is social has failed to appear. Conversely, when our definition of the social is retraced, the common definition of the social has to vanish first. It’s hard to see a more extreme contrast: it is either a society or a network.

So, network is an expression to check how much energy, movement, and specificity our own reports are able to capture. Network is a concept, not a thing out there. It is a tool to help describe something, not what is being described. It has the same relationship with the topic at hand as a perspective grid to a traditional single point perspective painting: drawn first, the lines might allow one to project a threedimensional object onto a flat piece of linen; but they are not what is to be painted, only what has allowed the painter to give the impression of depth before they are erased. In the same way, a network is not what is represented in the text, but what readies the text to take the relay of actors as mediators. The consequence is that you can provide an actor-network account of topics which have in no way the shape of a network—a symphony, a piece of legislation, a rock from the moon, an engraving. Conversely, you may well write about technical networks—television, e-mails, satellites, salesforce—without at any point providing an actor-network account.

But is it not somewhat disingenuous to retain the tricky word network to describe such a benchmark of literary quality? I agree that it does not resemble other words I have used up to now like group, actor, actant, group, fluid, and non-human, which are chosen voluntarily because of their benighted meaninglessness. This one, on the contrary, has too many meanings! The confusion took place—it is our fault entirely—because some of the earlier objects described by ANT were networks in the technical sense—metrology, subways, telephones— and also because when this term was introduced twenty-five years ago, the Internet had not struck—nor had al-Qaida for that matter. So, network was a novelty that could help in eliciting a contrast with ‘Society’, ‘institution’, ‘culture’, ‘fields’, etc. which were often conceived as surfaces, floods of causal transfers, and real matters of fact. But nowadays, networks have become the rule and surfaces the exception. It has lost its sharp edge.[^185] If I believed in jargon and if worknet or action net had any chance to hold, I would offer it as a substitute so as to make the contrast between technical networks and worknets, the latter remaining a way for social scientists to make sense of the former.[^186] Work-nets could allow one to see the labor that goes on in laying down net-works: the first as an active mediator, the second as a stabilized set of intermediaries.

Whatever the word, we need something to designate flows of translations. Why not use the word network, since it is now there and solidly attached by a little hyphen to the word actor that I redefined earlier? There exists no good word anyway, only sensible usage; in addition, the original material metaphor still retains the three important features I wish to induce with this expression:

a) a point-to-point connection is being established which is physically traceable and thus can be recorded empirically; b) such a connection leaves empty most of what is not connected, as any fisherman knows when throwing his net in the sea;[^187]

c) this connection is not made for free, it requires effort as any fisherman knows when repairing it on the deck.

To make it fit our purposes, we have to add a fourth feature that, I agree, breaks down the original metaphor somewhat: a network is not made of nylon thread, words or any durable substance but is the trace left behind by some moving agent. You can hang your fish nets to dry, but you can’t hang an actor-network: it has to be traced anew by the passage of another vehicle, another circulating entity.

The weakness of the notion derives partly from the dissemination of rather simple-minded visual representations. At first, the graph representation of networks, seen as star-like embranchments out of which lines leave to connect other points that have nothing but new connections, provided a rough but faithful equivalent to those In order to trace an actor-network, what we have to do is to add to the many traces left by the social fluid through which the traces are rendered again present, provided something happens in it. In an actornetwork account the relative proportion of mediators to intermediaries is increased. I will call such a description a risky account, meaning that it can easily fail—it does fail most of the time—since it can put aside neither the complete artificiality of the enterprise nor its claim to accuracy and truthfulness. As to its relevance for the actors themselves and the political impact it might have, this is even less automatic—as we shall see in the Conclusion. The whole question is to see whether the event of the social can be extended all the way to the event of the reading through the medium of the text. This is the price to pay for objectivity, or rather ‘objectfullness’ to be achieved.

Back to basics: a list of notebooks[^188]

The best way to proceed at this point and to feed off this fifth source of uncertainty is simply to keep track of all our moves, even those that deal with the very production of the account. This is neither for the sake of epistemic reflexivity nor for some narcissist indulgence into one’s own work, but because from now on everything is data: everything from the first telephone call to a prospective interviewee, the first appointment with the advisor, the first corrections made by a client on a grant proposal, the first launching of a search engine, the first list of boxes to tick in a questionnaire. In keeping with the logic of our interest in textual reports and accounting, it might be useful to list the different notebooks one should keep—manual or digital, it no longer matters much.[^189]

The first notebook should be reserved as a log of the enquiry itself. This is the only way to document the transformation one undergoes by doing the travel. Appointments, reactions to the study by others, surprises to the strangeness of the field, and so on, should be documented as regularly as possible. Without it, the artificial experiment of going into the field, of encountering a new state of affairs, will be quickly lost. Even years after, it should remain possible to know how the study was conceived, which person was met, what source was accessed, and so on, at a precise date and time.

A second notebook should be kept for gathering information in such a way that it is possible simultaneously to keep all the items in a chronological order and to dispatch them into categories which will evolve later into more and more refined files and subfiles. There exists lots of software nowadays that maintain this contradictory specification, but older hands like me have benefited enormously from the tedious rewriting of data onto cards. Whatever the solution, the movement through one frame of reference to the next is greatly facilitated if the data set can be kept at once unspoiled while still being reshuffled in as many arrangements as possible. This is the only way to become as pliable and articulate as the subject matter to be tackled.

A third notebook should be always at hand for ad libitum writing trials. The unique adequacy one should strive for in deploying complex imbroglios cannot be obtained without continuous sketches and drafts. It is impossible to imagine that one would gather the data for a period of time and only then begin to write it down. Writing a report is too risky to fall into this divide between enquiring and reporting. What comes spontaneously out of the keyboard are generalities, cliche´s, transportable definitions, substitutable accounts, ideal-types, powerful explanations, abstractions, in brief, the stuff out of which more social genres write themselves effortlessly. To counteract this trend, many efforts have to be made to break the automatic writing up; it’s not easier to write textual accounts as it is in a laboratory to discover the right experimental design. But ideas, paragraphs, metaphors, and tropes might come haphazardly during the course of the study. If they are not allowed to find a place and an outlet, they will either be lost or, worse yet, will spoil the hard work of data collecting by mixing the meta-language of the actors with that of the analysts. So it is always good practice to reserve a separate space for the many ideas that may spring to mind even if they will only be used years later.

A fourth type of notebook should be carefully kept to register the effects of the written account on the actors whose world has been either deployed or unified. This second experiment, added to the fieldwork itself, is essential to check how an account plays its role of assembling the social. The study might be finished, but the experiment goes on: the new account adds its performative action to all the others, and that too produces data. It does not mean that those who have been studied have the right to censor what has been written about them, nor does it mean that the analyst has the incredible right of ignoring what his ‘informants’ say about the invisible forces that make them act. Rather, it means that a new negotiation begins to decide what are the ingredients out of which the one common world might be made—or not.[^190] Since the relevance of a risky account might occur much later, the trails left in its wake also have to be documented.

It might be disappointing for the reader to realize that the grand questions of group formation, agency, metaphysics, and ontology that I have reviewed so far have to be tackled with no more grandiose resources than tiny notebooks to be kept during the fully artificial procedure of fieldwork and enquiries. But I warned the reader in advance: there is nothing more rewarding to be had and there is no faster way. After all, Archimedes was in need of nothing more than a fixed point to raise the world. Einstein equipped his observers with only a rod and a stopwatch: Why would we require heavier equipment to creep through the dark tiny conduits traced by blind ants? If you don’t want to take notes and to write them down well, don’t try to get into sociology: it’s the only way there is to become slightly more objective. If those textual accounts are said to be not ‘scientific enough’, I will retort that although they might not look scientific in the cliche´d definition of the adjective, they might be according to the only definition that interests me here: they try to grasp some recalcitrant objects through some artificial device with utmost accuracy, even though this enterprise may very well come up empty. If only a fraction of the energy devoted in social sciences to the commentary of our eminent predecessors was converted into fieldwork! As Garfinkel has taught us: it’s practice all the way down.

Deployment not critique

To add in a messy way to a messy account of a messy world does not seem like a very grandiose activity. But we are not after grandeur: the goal is to produce a science of the social uniquely suited to the specificity of the social in the same way that all other sciences had to invent devious and artificial ways to be true to the specific phenomena on which they wished to get a handle on. If the social circulates and is visible only when it shines through the concatenations of mediators, then this is what has to be replicated, cultivated, elicited, and expressed by our textual accounts. The task is to deploy actors as networks of mediations—hence the hyphen in the composite word ‘actor-network’. Deployment is not the same as ‘mere description’, nor is it the same as ‘unveiling’, ‘behind’ the actors’ backs, the ‘social forces at work’. If anything, it looks more like a PCR amplification of some small DNA sample.[^191]

And what is so wrong with ‘mere descriptions’?[^192] A good text is never an unmediated portrait of what it describes—nor for that matter is a portrait.[^193] It is always part of an artificial experiment to replicate and emphasize the traces generated by trials in which actors become mediators or mediators are turned into faithful intermediaries. There is nothing less natural than to go into fieldwork and remain a fly on the wall, pass out questionnaires, draw maps, dig up archives, record interviews, play the role of a participant-observer, compile statistics, and ‘Google’ one’s way around the Internet. De-scribing, inscribing, narrating, and writing final reports are as unnatural, complex, and painstaking as dissecting fruit flies or sending a telescope into space. If you find Faraday’s experiments oddly artificial, what about PittRivers’s ethnographic expeditions? If you believe Lord Kelvin’s laboratory contrived, what about Marx compiling footnotes in the British Library, Freud asking people to free-associate on his Viennese couch, or Howard Becker learning how to play jazz in order to take notes on jazz playing? The simple act of recording anything on paper is already an immense transformation that requires as much skill and just as much artifice as painting a landscape or setting up some elaborate biochemical reaction. No scholar should find humiliating the task of sticking to description. This is, on the contrary, the highest and rarest achievement.

However, we worry that by sticking to description there may be something missing, since we have not ‘added to it’ something else that is often call an ‘explanation’. And yet the opposition between description and explanation is another of these false dichotomies that should be put to rest—especially when it is ‘social explanations’ that are to be wheeled out of their retirement home. Either the networks that make possible a state of affairs are fully deployed—and then adding an explanation will be superfluous—or we ‘add an explanation’ stating that some other actor or factor should be taken into account, so that it is the description that should be extended one step further. If a description remains in need of an explanation, it means that it is a bad description. There is an exception, however, if it refers to a fairly stable state of affairs where some actors do indeed play the role of fully determined—and thus of fully ‘explained’ intermediaries—but in this case we are back to simpler pre-relativist cases. This new diffidence for an explanation ‘added’ to a description is all the more important because it is usually when a ‘frame’ is called in that the sociology of the social insinuates its redundant cause. As soon as a site is placed ‘into a framework’, everything becomes rational much too fast and explanations begin to flow much too freely. The danger is all the greater because this is the moment most often chosen by critical sociology, always lurking in the background, to take over social explanations and replace the objects to be accounted for with irrelevant, all-purpose ‘social forces’ actors that are too dumb to see or can’t stand to be revealed. Much like ‘safe sex’, sticking to description protects against the transmission of explanations.

Here again, it is the attempt at imitating a false view of the natural sciences that bogs down the social ones: it is always felt that description is too particular, too idiosyncratic, too localized. But, contrary to the scholastic proverb, there is science only of the particular.[^194] If connections are established between sites, it should be done through more descriptions, not by suddenly taking a free ride through all-terrain entities like Society, Capitalism, Empire, Norms, Individualism, Fields, and so on. A good text should trigger in a good reader this reaction: ‘Please, more details, I want more details.’ God is in the details, and so is everything else—including the Devil. It’s the very character of the social to be specific. The name of the game is not reduction, but irreduction. As Gabriel Tarde never tired of saying: ‘To exist is to differ.’

To deploy simply means that through the report concluding the enquiry the number of actors might be increased; the range of agencies making the actors act might be expanded; the number of objects active in stabilizing groups and agencies might be multiplied; and the controversies about matters of concern might be mapped. Only those who have never tried to write about mediators instead of intermediaries will say that this is an easy task, something akin to ‘mere description’. For us, on the contrary, it requires exactly as much invention as a laboratory experiment for every new case at hand—and success is just as rare. If we succeed, which is not automatic and is not obtained simply by putting ‘PhD’ at the bottom of one’s signature, a good account will perform the social in the precise sense that some of the participants in the action—through the controversial agency of the author—will be assembled in such a way that they can be collected together. It does not sound like much, and yet it is far from being totally negligible.

The problem is that social scientists too often alternate between hubris—each of them dream to be the Newton of social science as well as the Lenin of social change—or desperation—they despise themselves for merely piling on more reports, stories, and statistics that no one will read. But the choice between complete mastery and total irrelevance is a very superficial one. To despair of one’s own written text doesn’t make any more sense than for the head of a chemistry laboratory to want to be relevant to the NIH. Relevance, like everything else, is an achievement. A report is interesting or not depending on the amount of work done to interest, that is, to place it between other things.[^195] This is exactly what the five uncertainties added together might help to reveal: What is the social made up of? What is acting when we are acting? What sort of grouping do we pertain to? What do we want? What sort of world are we ready to share? All those questions are raised not only by scholars, but also by those they study. It is not that we, social scientists, know the answer that would reside behind the actors, nor is it the case that they, the famous ‘actors themselves’, know the answer. The fact is that no one has the answers—this is why they have to be collectively staged, stabilized, and revised. This is why the social sciences are so indispensable to the reassembling of the social. Without them we don’t know what we have in common, we don’t know through which connections we are associated together, and we would have no way to detect how we can live in the same common world.

In order to generate those answers, every new artifice might be welcome, including that of a social scientist’s tiny interpretation. Failure is not more certain than success. It’s certainly worth a try. This is precisely because all the five sources of uncertainty are nested into one another, that a report written by some humble colleague who does not even wear a white coat may make a difference. It may offer a provisional staging of the connections it has managed to deploy. It offers an artificial site (the textual account) that might be able to solve for some particular audience the question of which common world they pertain to. Assembled around the ‘laboratory’ of the text, authors as well as readers may begin to render visible the two mechanisms that account for the plurality of associations to be taken into account and for the stabilization or unification of the world they wish to live in.[^196][^197] On the one hand, it is just a text made up of reams of paper sullied by an inkjet or burnt by a laser beam. On the other, it is a precious little institution to represent, or more exactly to re-represent—that is, to present again—the social to all its participants, to perform it, to give it a form. It is not much, but to ask for more is often settling for less. Many ‘powerful explanations’ might turn out to be less convincing than weaker ones.

In the last page of his book on sociology of science, Pierre Bourdieu defines the possibility for the sociologist to reach the famous God’s eye view of nowhere after having purged himself of all perspectives through an extreme application of critical reflexivity:

This is probably the most honest version ever given of the dream of critical sociology as this was written a few months before Bourdieu’s untimely disappearance.

To anguish over the potential efficacy of sociological texts is to show lack of modesty or lack of ambition. If anything, the success of social sciences in spreading through the social world is even more astounding than the expansion of the natural sciences and technological devices. Can we overestimate the changes achieved in the way every one of us is now ‘having a gender’ that has been brought about by the tiny texts of feminist scholars? What would we know about the ‘Other’ without anthropologists’ accounts? Who could size up one’s past without archaeologists and historians? Who would be able to navigate without the geographers? Who would have an unconscious without the psychologists? Who would know whether or not a profit is made without the accountants? To be sure, texts look like miserable pathways to move between the many contradictory frames of reference, and yet their efficacy is unmatched by the more grandiose and powerful social explanations that are proposed to humiliate them. It is not because the sociologist cannot occupy the place of the allencompassing and all-seeing God of social science that he or she has to be imprisoned blind in a cellar. We, the little ants, should not settle for heaven or hell, as there are plenty of things on this earth to munch our way through.

---

[^171]: This is where ANT crosses the resources of ethnomethodology—including the key notion of ‘accountability’—with those of semiotics. Strangely enough, for all his attention to practice Garfinkel never points out the practice of writing—which might go some way toward explaining his style! After years of teaching in England and America, I have been forced to recognize that semiotics does not survive sea travels. Attention to text qua text remains a continental obsession.

[^172]: I use report as a generic term. It might be an article, a file, a website, a poster, a PowerPoint presentation, a performance, an oral exam, a documentary film, an artistic installation.

[^173]: See Franc¸oise Bastide (2001), Una notte con Saturno: Scritti semiotici sul discorso scientifico for a collection of essays. For work in English, see Franc¸oise Bastide (1990), ‘The Iconography of Scientific Texts: Principle of Analysis’; F. Bastide, M. Callon and J.P. Courtial (1989), ‘The Use Of Review Articles In The Analysis Of A Research Area’, Franc¸oise Bastide and Greg Myers (1992), ‘A Night With Saturne’.

[^174]: In an otherwise fascinating book on the writing of history, Carlo Ginzburg (1999), History, Rhetoric, and Proof is still trying to reconcile the two opposites of rhetoric and reference without realizing this other crucial difference.

[^175]: A scholarly association, ‘Science and Literature’, is now devoted in part to this task. See their journal Configurations.

[^176]: This is all the less surprising since matters of fact are a political invention, a sort of ideal citizenship invented in the 17th century to convoke the assembly of nature. Humans may comply with this political role but why would non-humans?

[^177]: This will be probably taken as another instance of my science studies chauvinism, but a characteristic of our subfield is that it is remarkably free of jargon.

[^178]: I am perfectly happy with the resonance of the word not only with Garfinkel’s accountability but also with ‘accounting books’, since the weak but essential link of accounting with economics has been one of the most productive, and unlikely, domains of science studies. See Alain Desrosie`res (2002), The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reasoning and Michael Power (1995), Accounting and Science: Natural Inquiry and Commercial Reason. For an even more surprising case, see Quattrone ‘Accounting for God’.

[^179]: Those reviewed in Lindsay Waters (2004), Enemies of Promise: Publishing, Perishing, and the Eclipse of Scholarship have often taken their cues from France, without realizing that the French steeped in Bachelard and Canguilhem never for a moment believed that they were extending their arguments to science. In France, you can be at once naively rationalist and a great admirer of deconstruction. Once transported across the Atlantic, this innocent passion became a dangerous binary weapon.

[^180]: The same epistemologists who have fallen in love with Popper’s falsifiability principle would be well advised to prolong his insight all the way to the text itself and to render explicit the conditions under which their writing can fail as well.

[^181]: This is referred to as ‘objects of value’. See usage in Greimas’s study of Maupassant, Algirdas Julien Greimas (1988), Maupassant: The Semiotics of Text. Practical Exercises.

    ‘This one should satisfy you for today. There was a woman who had just given birth to a child; as a result, she suffered a most alarming attack of the vapors—compulsive tears and laughter, a sense of suffocation, convulsions, swelling of the breasts, melancholy silence, piercing shrieks—all the most serious symptoms—and this went on for several years. Now this woman was passionately in love, and eventually she began to think she saw signs indicating that her lover had grown wary of her illness and complaints

[^182]: In that sense it is the equivalent of the ethnomethodologists’ notion of ‘unique adequacy’, provided the notion of account has been enriched by that of textual account.

[^183]: On Diderot’s network philosophy of nature, see Wilda Anderson (1990), Diderot’s Dream.

    and was beginning to break off their affair. That was when she decided that she must either get well or make an end of herself. In this way there began a sort of civil war inside her own consciousness. Sometimes this war would turn to the advantage of the master; sometimes the subjects would get the upper hand. Whenever the two sides were equal, so that the force exerted by the fibers exactly counterbalanced that of the center of the bundle [S’il arrivait que l’action des filets du re´seau fuˆt e´gale a` la re´action de leur origine], she would fall to the ground as though dead. Then, when carried to her bed, she would lie for hours on end, entirely motionless and almost lifeless. On other occasions the effect would be only one of general lassitude or exhaustion or loss of consciousness from which it often seemed she would never recover. For six months she kept up the struggle. Whenever the rebellion began in her fibers she was able to feel it coming on. She would stand up, run about, busy herself with the most vigorous forms of physical exercise, climb up and down stairs, saw wood or shovel dirt. She would make the center of her network, the organ of will power, as rigid as possible by saying to herself: You must conquer or die.’ (Diderot 1964)

[^184]: To say that it’s an actor-network is to say that it’s specific and that the principles of its expansion are rendered visible and the price for its deployment fully paid.

[^185]: As Boltanski and Chiapello’s, The New Spirit of Capitalism has shown, it can even be used to characterize what is worst in the recent metamorphosis of capitalist modes of production.

[^186]: Action net, as proposed in Barbara Czarniawska (2004), ‘On Time, Space, and Action Nets’.

[^187]: This point will become even more essential when, at the end of Part II, we will deal with the notion of ‘plasma’. Emptiness is the key in following the rare conduits in which the social circulates.

[^188]: This was shown in the early Leximappe tools in Michel Callon, John Law and Arie Rip (1986), Mapping the Dynamics of Science and Technology. However, there are now many more graphic devices that have been developed. See Alberto Cambrosio, Peter Keating and Andrei Mogoutov (2004), ‘Mapping Collaborative Work and Innovation in Biomedicine’. Viewed as representation it is naive, but viewed as theory it’s a formidable help to abstraction. See their early use in Genevie`ve Teil (1991), ‘Candide2, un outil de sociologie assiste´e par ordinateur pour l’analyse quantitative de gros corpus de textes’.

[^189]: I am using notebooks rather metaphorically since they now include digital files as well as films, interviews, and websites.

[^190]: Witness the length of time it took from the long experiment of science studies of the first publications to the Science Wars. And yet, as I have shown in the previous chapter, without a careful documentation the experiment of science studies would have been wasted.

[^191]: See Law, After Method, p. 112. See also the beautiful term ‘enactement’ used by Mol and ‘choreography’ in Charis Cussins (1996), ‘Ontological Choreography: Agency through Objectification in Infertility Clinics’.

[^192]: The useful notion of ‘thick description’ provides a welcome attention to details but not necessarily to style. ‘Thickness’ should also designate: ‘Have I assembled enough?’ It should give the word ‘assembling’ a political meaning, something we will come across in the Conclusion.

[^193]: See Joseph Leo Koerner (1997), The Moment of Self-Portraiture in German Renaissance Art.

[^194]: Monographs in social science is one of the contributions of Tarde. See Tarde, Social Laws, p. 92. In Tarde’s general view of societies, human societies are typical because of the small number of agents they mobilize, contrary to biology or physics that deal with millions or billions of elements. So being particular is what encountering the social is all about.

[^195]: Science studies have followed many of the relevance-making strategies in hard sciences and documented many failures. See Michel Callon (1989), La science et ses re´seaux: Gene`se et circulation des faits scientifiques and John Law (2002), Aircraft Stories: Decentering the Object in Technoscience. On the notion of interest, see also Stengers, Power and Invention.

    ‘While [the sociologist] must also beware, lest he forget that like any other scientist he is to attempt to help build science’s aperspectival perspective, as a social agent he is also placed within the object which he takes as his object, and on these grounds he has a perspective which does not coincide with others, nor with the overview and over-arching perspective of the quasi-divine observer, which he can reach if the field’s demands are satisfied. Thus he knows that the particularity of the social sciences calls upon him to work (as I have tried to do for the case of the gift and of labor in the pascalian meditations) to construct a scientific truth capable of integrating the observer’s vision and the truth of the agent’s practical vision, into a perspective not known as such which is put to the test in the illusion of the absolute.’ (Bourdieu 2001)197

[^196]: Those two functions are part of the definition of politics. See Conclusion.

[^197]: Kindly translated by Simon Schaffer.
