# How to Keep the Social Flat

_Source pages: 176–183_

Users of social science seem to consider that it’s rather straightforward to assemble, invoke, convoke, mobilize, and explain the social. Practitioners of social science know how painful, costly, arduous, and utterly puzzling it is. The ‘easy’ social is the one already bundled together, while the ‘difficult’ social is the new one that has yet to appear in stitching together elements that don’t pertain to the usual repertoire. Depending on which tracer we decide to follow we will embark on very different sorts of travels. Sociologists of the social have traced, with their definition of a social, a vast domain that bears no relation whatsoever with the maps we are going to need for our definition of the social. I am not only saying that existing maps are incomplete, but that they designate territories with such different shapes that they don’t even overlap! It is not even clear if they pertain to the same Earth. The job now before us is no longer to go to different places in the same country—less crowded sites, less trodden paths—but to generate an altogether different landscape so we can travel through it. Needless to say, this is not going to speed up our trips: ‘slowciology’ it was in Part I, ‘slowciology’ it will remain.

Since what is now at stake is the very topography of the social, there is no way to decide how to draw our itineraries without understanding the principle of projection sociologists of the social have used for theirs. It’s only by seeing how they have been led astray that we will grasp why they drew those implausible maps. When you begin to ask this question you realize how arduous their travails have been. They have been forced to constantly migrate between two types of sites—the local interaction and the global context—each so uncomfortable that they had to flee from them as fast as possible. Adam and Eve had been chased out of only one paradise, but sociologists of the social, less fortunate than their forebears, have been forced to leave two resting places in succession, each situated at the polar opposite of the other, and have been shuttling between both. We have to grasp the dynamic of this infernal trip if we wish to escape their fate.

Every social scientist knows quite well that local interactions are not a good place to rest. When, for one reason or another, you happen to come on the stage, you become quickly aware that most of the ingredients composing the scene have not been brought there by you and that many have been improvised on the spot by the other participants. An infant learning to speak finds her language already there in her mother’s competent use. A plaintiff summoned to face the judge discovers the edifice of law firmly in place and the Old Bailey building as ancient as London. A worker, who labors all day on the floor of a sweatshop, discovers quite quickly that his fate has been settled by invisible agents who are hidden behind the office walls at the other end of the shop. A pedestrian with a strained ankle learns in the doctor’s office about her skeleton and physiology that predate the time of her accident. A local ‘informant’, prodded by the questions of a visiting ethnographer, realizes that most of his habits of thought are coming from places and agencies over which he has no control. And so on. Interactions do not resemble a picnic where all the food is gathered on the spot by the participants, but rather a reception given by some unknown sponsors who have staged everything down to the last detail—even the place to sit might be already pre-inscribed by some attentive keeper.

So, it is perfectly true to say that any given interaction seems to overflow with elements which are already in the situation coming from some other time, some other place, and generated by some other agency. This powerful intuition is as old as the social sciences. As I have said earlier, action is always dislocated, articulated, delegated, translated. Thus, if any observer is faithful to the direction suggested by this overflow, she will be led away from any given interaction to some other places, other times, and other agencies that appear to have molded them into shape. It is as if a strong wind forbade anyone to stick to the local site and blew bystanders away; as if a strong current was always forcing us to abandon the local scene.

The problem is where to go from there. It’s at this point that the confusion between body politic and society is threatening to lead us astray. Although there is indeed, in every interaction, a dotted line that leads to some virtual, total, and always preexisting entity, this is just the track that should not be followed, at least for now: virtual and shadowy it is, virtual and shadowy it should remain. Where political action has to proceed forward, sociologists should fear to tread. Yes, interactions are made to exist by other actors but, no, those sites do not form a context around them.

As we have already witnessed on many occasions, there is often a wide gap between the correct intuitions of social sciences and the odd solutions they provide. This is once again the case: they have tended to confuse the projection of the Phantom Public with the pre-eminence of society. It’s true that both have only a virtual existence but not in the same way. The first is a constant appeal to resume the impossible feat of politics, while the second is nothing but a way to dissimulate the task of composition by doing as if it was already completed: society is there, above our heads. So, when inquirers begin to look away from local sites because obviously the key of the interactions is not to be found there—which is true enough—they believe they have to turn their attention toward the ‘framework’ inside of which interactions are supposed to be nested—and here things go terribly wrong. Starting with the right impulse—let’s get away from local interactions!—they end up, to borrow from Samuel Butler’s famous title, in Erewhon.

Such a direction has been so solidly entrenched by one hundred and fifty years of social science that it now appears as some mass migration along large freeways built at great expenses and guided by huge bright signposts on which is written: ‘Context, 15 km, Next Stop’. So automatic has become the custom to reach those sites when you are dissatisfied with local interactions that it is very hard to recognize that it goes nowhere at all. After a short smooth ride, those freeways suddenly vanish into thin air. At Context, there is no place to park. From the infant speech act is it really possible to go to the ‘structure’ of language? From the plaintiff case is there any way to go to a ‘system’ of law? From the floor of the sweatshop is there any canal that goes to a ‘capitalist mode of production’ or to an ‘empire’? From the strained ankle of the patient is there a pathway to lead to the ‘nature’ of the body? From the ethnographer’s notebook is it likely that one will reach the ‘culture’ of this specific people? As soon as those questions are raised, the answer is an embarrassed ‘no, yes, maybe’.

To be sure, the structure of language is spoken by nobody in particular and yet it is out of this that all speech acts are generated, although the ways in which la parole meets la langue have remained totally mysterious ever since the time of Saussure.[^212] The system of law doesn’t reside anywhere in particular and yet is invoked no less mysteriously in every specific case, even though it is recognized that it has to be made up of some ad hoc totality for each case.[^213] Capitalism is certainly the dominant mode of production but no one imagines that there is some homonculus CEO in command, despite the fact that many events look like they obey some implacable strategy.[^214] The knowledge of the body is what allows specific illnesses to be diagnosed, although it is also clear that it is only from the case at hand that most information is made relevant.[^215] A culture is simultaneously that which makes people act, a complete abstraction created by the ethnographer’s gaze, and what is generated on the spot by the constant inventiveness of members’ interactions.[^216] Even though they seem to be what any inquiry is forced to reach in order to make sense of local interactions, structural features seem to offer resting spots about as comfortable as a bush of poison ivy.

So, the uneasy answer one gets regarding those famed ‘contexts’ is that there exists something that renders the interaction possible by bringing on the scene most of its necessary ingredients, but that this ‘something’ is at once present behind and much too abstract to do anything. Structure is very powerful and yet much too weak and remote to have any efficacy. What is said to be the true source of everything ‘real’ and ‘concrete’ that takes place in interactions does not seem to offer any dwelling for long. This is why, as if they had reached the far end of a stretched out rubber band, social scientists are suddenly pulled in the opposite direction from ‘deep structural features’ back to the more ‘real’ and ‘concrete’ interactions. A second wind, a second current no less violent than the first, is now forcing any visitor away from the context and back to the local practical sites. Has the recent history of the social sciences not been in large part a painful oscillation between two opposite poles, one more structural and the other more pragmatic?[^217]

Unfortunately, trying to stick to the local scene at the end of the return trip is not much of a solution since the forces that have pushed enquirers away are still in place: it remains obvious that what is ‘real’ and ‘concrete’ does not fully reside in those interactions either. Torn between two opposite directions, the enquirer finds herself in an impossible situation. When she sticks to interactions, she is requested to go away and to ‘put things in their wider context’. But when she finally reaches that structuring context, she is asked to leave the abstract level for ‘real life’, ‘human size’, ‘lived-in’ sites. But if ‘structure’ is an abstraction, so is interaction! If one is more real and concrete, so is the other—the other pole, always the other pole. This is enough of a double bind to render any enquirer fully disoriented. Plato claimed that one had to ascend from the confusing and material shadows to the real and immaterial ideas. But what if, with exactly as much reason, an anti-Plato was also leading you in the other direction to descend from the abstract ideas to the real and material local world? You would be torn apart by such a tug of war, alternating abruptly between a frame in which interactions have to be situated—in society—and a violent movement to do away with ‘overarching frameworks’ that goes back to the local and individual setting where things ‘really happen’ and are ‘really lived’. The pull and push of a child’s swing is fun, but only for a while and certainly not when shoved so hard that one’s stomach begins to feel queasy.

This abrupt alternation has been called the actor/system quandary or the micro/macro debate. The question is to decide whether the actor is ‘in’ a system or if the system is made up ‘of’ interacting actors. If only the vertiginous swing could come to a gentle stop. Usually, the strategy is to politely recognize the problem, to declare that it is an artificial question, and then to proceed by carving up some cozy place in what is supposedly an academic debate by imagining some reasonable compromise between the two positions.[^218] But if you discover some happy medium between two non-existing positions, what makes you so sure that this third position has not even less claim to existence? Should we try to strike a compromise between actors and system, or should we go somewhere else?

On the face of it, ‘actor-network’ should be a good candidate for a compromise: the preformatted solution would be to consider at once the actor and the network in which it is embedded—which would account for the hyphen. Such a lukewarm solution would add itself to the many others which have been proposed in order to reconcile the two obvious necessities of the social sciences: interactions are overflowed by some structures that give shape to them; those structures themselves remain much too abstract as long as they have not instantiated, mobilized, realized, or incarnated into some sort of local and lived interaction. The temptation is all the greater since dialectics, like Ulysses’s sirens, might generously offer its profusion of loops to wrap up and tie off such compromises: actors will be said to be simultaneously held by the context and holding it in place, while the context will be at once what makes actors behave and what is being made in turn by the actors’ feedback. With circular gestures of the two hands turning faster and faster in opposite directions, it is possible to give an appearance of smooth reason to a connection between two sites whose existence remains as problematic as before. Dialectical thinkers have the knack to bury artifacts even deeper by claiming that contradictions have been ‘overcome’—this being the magic word they use for ‘covered up’ or ‘spirited away’. And again, it’s not difficult to see why they remain so convincing even though their hands connect non-existing sites. It is true that the Phantom Public can be drawn only through a looping movement that resembles a dialectic circle.[^219] But this indispensable ‘lasso’ used to draw the paradoxical connection of citizens with their representatives loses all its virtue when it’s taken to be the relation of an actor ‘inside’ a system. While the body politic is artificially made up and vanishes as soon as the loop is interrupted, it seems that society will loom there, whatever we do to it. The actor/system quandary is the unwanted projection onto the plane of social theory of the paradoxical relations citizens entertain with their republic.

This is why the solution explored by ANT, in spite of its somewhat unfortunate label, has nothing to do with offering still another compromise between micro and macro, actor and system—and even less with pushing the swing so forcefully that it circles through some dialectic circles. To follow our argument it’s essential, on the contrary, not to try to be clever by striking an even more sophisticated balance between the two cliche´s of social science. We do not claim that interactions do not really exist because they have to be ‘put into’ a context, nor that context never really exists because it is always ‘instantiated’ through individual practice. Instead, we claim that another movement, entirely different from the one usually followed, reveals itself most clearly through the very difficulty of sticking either to a place considered as local or to a place taken as the context for the former one. Our solution is to take seriously the impossibility of staying in one of the two sites for a long period. Here again, we have to behave like good ants and to be as moronic, as literalist, as positivist, as relativist as possible. If there is no way to stay in either place, it simply means that those places are not to be reached—either because they don’t exist at all or because they exist but cannot be reached with the vehicle offered by sociology.

Just as we decided in Part I to feed off uncertainties instead of cutting through them, it might be possible to profit from this endless alternation between polar opposites to learn something about the real topography of the social. ANT is simply that social theory which has turned ‘the Big Problem’ of social science from a resource into a topic to solve it. It makes the assumption that the avoidance reflex instantiated twice by sociologists—from the local to the global and from the macro back to the micro—is not the mark of some infamous weakness on their part, but a very important sign that these sites are the shadow image of some entirely different phenomenon. Just as a horse might sense a cliff earlier than his rider, the intuition of the sociologists should be followed, but not the solution they have offered with their mistaken definition of the social. Once again, ANT hopes to be faithful to the tradition while extracting the poison that has debilitated it so much.

Even though the body politic is a shadow, a phantom, a fiction that is produced by the looping move of political action, this doesn’t mean that the social world has the same ethereal aspect. Politics, as we will see later, is only one way of composing the collective; it cannot provide the general pattern for a sociology of associations. But since analysts have used society to shortcut politics, they are never in a good position to differentiate the landscapes drawn by those various tracers. Obsessed by the goal of reaching the whole, they have made the task of collecting it much more difficult. Like nature, society is a premature assemblage: it should be put ahead of us and not behind.

Contrary to what Plato said in his Republic, there is not one but at least three ‘Big Animals’: the Body Politic, the Society, the Collective. But to be able to render these different beasts visible, distinguish their movements, track their various ethologies, detect their ecology, one must refuse again to be intelligent. One must remain as myopic as an ant in order to carefully misconstrue what ‘social’ usually means. One must travel on foot and stick to the decision not to accept any ride from any faster vehicle. Yes, we should follow the suggestion that interactions are overflowed by many ingredients already in place that come from other times, other spaces and other agents; yes, we should accept the idea of moving away to some other sites in order to find the sources of those many ingredients. But as soon as we get out of some interaction, we should ignore the giant signs ‘toward Context’ or ‘to Structure’; we should turn at a right angle, leave the freeways, and choose instead to walk through a tiny path not much wider than a donkey’s trail.

Although social scientists are proud of having added volume to flat interactions, it turns out that they have gone too fast. By taking for granted this third dimension—even if it’s to criticize its existence— they have withdrawn from inquiry the main phenomenon of social science: the very production of place, size, and scale. Against such a three-dimensional shape, we have to try to keep the social domain completely flat. It’s really a question of cartography. Because of the underlining necessity of the body politic, social scientists have thought that society provided a third dimension in which all the interactions should find a place. This explains why they make such an inordinate consumption of three-dimensional images: spheres, pyramids, monuments, systems, organisms, organizations. To resist this temptation, I am going to offer a 2-D projection. In pursuing the topographic metaphor, it’s as if we had to emulate in social theory the marvelous book Flatland, which tries to make us 3-D animals live inside a 2-D world only made up of lines. It might seem odd at first but we have to become the Flat-Earthers of social theory.[^220] This is the only way to follow how dimensions are generated and maintained. It’s as if the maps handed down to us by the tradition had been crumpled into a useless bundle and we have to retrieve them from the wastebasket. Through a series of careful restorations, we have to flatten them out on a table with the back of our hand until they become legible and usable again. Although this ironing out may seem counterintuitive, it is the only way to measure the real distance every social connection has to overcome to generate some sort of tracing. What was hopelessly crinkled must now be fully deployed.

The aim of this second part is to practice a sort of corrective calisthenics. I will proceed in three steps: we will first relocate the global so as to break down the automatism that leads from interaction to ‘Context’; we will then redistribute the local so as to understand why interaction is such an abstraction; and finally, we will connect the sites revealed by the two former moves, highlighting the various vehicles that make up the definition of the social understood as association.[^221]

Once this alternative topography has been sketched, it will finally be possible to discuss the political relevance of sociology without confusing the already made society with the delicate and risky loop of the public. Then, and only then, will the collective have enough room to collect itself.

---

[^212]: For one of the many instances of pragmatics eating up at the structural elements of language, see Alessandro Duranti and Charles Goodwin (1992), Rethinking Context: Language as an Interactive Phenomenon.

[^213]: See Niklas Luhmann (1985), A Sociological Theory of Law.

[^214]: See Philip Mirowski (2001), Machine Dreams. Economics Becomes a Cyborg Science and Michel Callon (1998a), ‘An Essay on Framing and Overflowing: Economic Externalities Revisited by Sociology’.

[^215]: See Stefan Hirschauer (1991), ‘The Manufacture of Bodies in Surgery’ and Mol, The Body Multiple.

[^216]: For the dynamic production of culture, see Marshall Sahlins (2000), Culture in Practice and Marylin Strathern (1999), Property, Substance and Effect: Anthropological Essays in Persons and Things.

[^217]: The paradigm of this alternation is probably Parsons begetting Garfinkel. To every structuralist an interactionist will be born.

[^218]: For some of the many clever attempts, see Bourdieu, Outline; Anthony Giddens (1984), The Constitution of Society; and Erhard Friedberg (1993), Le pouvoir et la re`gle: Dynamiques de l’action organise´e.

[^219]: See Barbara Cassin (1995), L’effet sophistique. On the key notion of ‘autophuos’, see Chapters 7 and 8 of Latour, Pandora’s Hope.

[^220]: Flat Earthers are a subset of fringe science, but I am taking it here as an allusion to Edwin Abbott (1992), Flatland: a romance of many dimensions.

[^221]: To follow Part II, it might be useful to consult online Latour and Hermant, Paris the Invisible City because of the many different illustrations.
