# First Move: Localizing the Global

_Source pages: 184–201_

The first corrective move looks simple enough: we have to lay continuous connections leading from one local interaction to the other places, times, and agencies through which a local site is made to do something. This means that we have to follow the path indicated by the process of delegation or translation explained in Part I. As we have also learned in the preceding pages, this deployment might take the shape of a network on the condition that every transport be paid in transformations, that is, if we make sure to pave the whole way from one site to the next not with intermediaries but with full-blown mediators. If we do this, we will render visible the long chains of actors linking sites to one another without missing a single step. It might be empirically hard but we should not expect major theoretical hurdles.

Unfortunately, this would mean counting without the risk of confusing one track with another that has the same departure point—let’s get away from local interactions—but not the same end point because that one goes to Context, Structure, and Framework. Depending on which path we follow, the plot ends very differently. Either Little Red Riding Hood will be able to reach grandma’s house, or else she will be kidnapped in the forest. How can one plod along safely from one mediator to the next without being swallowed whole by the Wolf of Context? A ploy has to be found to make the two social theories diverge, letting the sociology of the social go its own way while the sociology of associations should be able to keep drawing more and more accurate road maps.

It does not require a deep understanding of topology to realize that the two don’t only differ by their end point, but also by the type of deformation they permit: when you put some local site ‘inside’ a larger framework, you are forced to jump. There is now a yawning break between what encloses and what is enclosed, between the more local and the more global. What would happen if we forbade any breaking or tearing and allowed only bending, stretching, and squeezing?

Could we then go continuously from the local interaction to the many delegating actors? The departure point and all the points recognized as its origin would now remain side by side and a connection, a fold would be made visible.

What is so important for our project is that, in such a flattened topography, if any action has to be transported from one site to the next, you now clearly need a conduit and a vehicle. In the other landscape, the embedded context and the embedded actor were so incommensurable, they were separated by such an unaccountable gap, that there was never any way to detect through which mysterious vehicle action was carried out. But that is not the case if the landscape is kept obsessively flat. The full cost of every connection is now entirely payable. If a site wants to influence another site, it has to levy the means. The tyranny of distance has been underlined again. Actors have become accountable. But if something is allowed to be ‘inside’ something else, then the third dimension of society is added and the whole of Merlin’s castle pops up out of the lake. To stop this magic, we have to make sure that no extra dimension will be added. To do so we have to invent a series of clamps to hold the landscape firmly flat and to force, so to speak, any candidate with a more ‘global’ role to sit beside the ‘local’ site it claims to explain, rather than watch it jump on top of it or behind it. In what follows, I am going to draw a rough inventory of some of those clamps.

Textbooks in sociology are organized around various topics—family, institution, nation-states, markets, health, deviance, and so on—which represent the slowly revisable outcome of the many decisions made by social scientists on what the right ingredients of the social world should be. In contrast, all of the idiosyncratic terms I am going to offer designate nothing more than specific tricks to help resist the temptation to jump to the global. Because of the corrective nature of this gymnastic movement, the virtues of those concepts are, first of all, negative. They pertain to our infra-language, such as the weak terms of ‘group’, ‘actor’, ‘agency’, ‘translation’, and ‘fluid’. Like the notion of network, they don’t designate what is being mapped, but how it is possible to map anything from such a territory. They are part of the equipment lying on the geographer’s desk to allow him to project shapes on a sheet of paper. This is why the terms I am going to review won’t say anything substantive about the social realm; they simply allow ANT scholars to render the social fluid collectable again in the same way entomologists learn how to build little bridges so that, without interfering with the ants’ travels, they can count them one by one.[^222] From Panopticon to Oligopticon

Myopic ANT scholars have a great advantage over sharp-sighted allencompassing overseers. Not only can they ask gross and silly questions, they can do so obstinately and collectively. The first kind of clamp is the one obtained by this rather naive query: ‘Where are the structural effects actually being produced?’ I am aware that this geographic question shows a terrible lack of manners, but I am a science student and so, for any piece of scientific knowledge, I am used to supplying its indispensable conditions of production.[^223] For example, even linguists need a room, an office, an institution, a department, boxes of archives, a place to stay, a coffee pot, and Xerox machine so as to gather all the elements, which have been extracted from thousands of local interactions and millions of speech acts, and carefully fabricate a linguistic structure.[^224] And the same is true of lawyers: the system of law is compiled using folders, libraries, meetings, etc.[^225] Even Karl Marx in the British Library needs a desk to assemble the formidable forces of capitalism. No more than language or law, physiology lives a mysterious and ethereal life: it is always produced somewhere, in such and such laboratory at the Royal College of Surgeons, in a freshly revised textbook, in a doctor’s cabinet, after a consensus meeting has modified the standard procedure for taking care of sprained ankles. Culture does not act surreptitiously behind the actor’s back. This most sublime production is manufactured at specific places and institutions, be it the messy offices on the top floor of Marshal Sahlins’s house on the Chicago University campus or the thick Area Files kept at the Pitts River museum in Oxford.[^226]

Other sociologists may ignore these production sites as so many transparent intermediaries since, according to their epistemology, they play no other role than to reveal the ‘fundamental structures’ of human actions, but historians and sociologists of science pay close attention. Ever since we decided to follow how matters of concern are generated by the various disciplines, we have to take into account the practical ways through which the knowledge of others’ actions is being daily produced. Is this relativism? I hope so. If no signal travels faster than light, no knowledge travels without scientists, laboratories, and fragile reference chains. Our interest for those humble means is not dictated by suspicion about the true efficacy of those structures or by some reflexive urge. It is simply that they offer ideal tracers for discovering what sort of relationship may exist for good between the micro and the macro. If the whole of physical space and physical time had to be reshaped because of the realization that no two signals are really sent simultaneously, then how much more social space and time will have to be reshuffled once every structural feature is brought firmly back inside its local conditions of production?

And sure enough, as soon as the local sites that manufacture global structures are underlined, it is the entire topography of the social world that is being modified. Macro no longer describes a wider or a larger site in which the micro would be embedded like some Russian Matryoshka doll, but another equally local, equally micro place, which is connected to many others through some medium transporting specific types of traces. No place can be said to be bigger than any other place, but some can be said to benefit from far safer connections with many more places than others. This move has the beneficial effect to keep the landscape flat, since what earlier, in the pre-relativist sociology, was situated ‘above’ or ‘below’ remains side by side and firmly on the same plane as the other loci which they were trying to overlook or include. What is now highlighted much more vividly than before are all the connections, the cables, the means of transportation, the vehicles linking places together. This is their strength but also, as we are going to see, their frailty.[^227] If you cut some underlying structure from its local application, nothing happens: it remains there in its mysterious empyrean; if you cut a structure-making site from its connections, it simply stops being able to structure anything.

Having reached this point, don’t try to be intelligent, don’t jump, don’t switch vehicles: if you do so, you’ll miss the embranchment and fail to trace the new landscape. Just follow the trails myopically. Ant you have accepted to be, ANT you will remain! If you stick obstinately enough to the decision of producing a continuous trail instead of a discontinuous one, then another mountain range begins to emerge. It is a landscape which runs through, crosses out, and totally shortcuts the former loci of ‘local interaction’ and of ‘global context’.

It’s not that there is no hierarchy, no ups and downs, no rifts, no deep canyons, no high spots. It is simply that if you wish to go from one site to another, then you have to pay the full cost of relation, connection, displacement, and information. No lifts, accelerations, or shortcuts are allowed. For example, the millions of speech acts that make up a dictionary, a grammar, or a language structure in a linguistics department have been extracted from local speech acts, which have been recorded, transcribed, collated, and classified in various ways using many different mediums.[^228] The fact that no structure acts unconsciously ‘under’ each speech act does not mean that it is made out of thin air by ‘local’ linguists stuck in their office. It means that the written structure is related, connected, associated to all the speech acts in some ways the enquiry should discover. Of course, the office of the linguist may have some relationship with what is spoken ‘out there’, but how would you imagine this relationship to be made without connections and at no cost, without a constant trade going on along the conduits leading to and from the office? These two-way relations are even stronger since grammar has also become, through years of schooling, a common feature of what it is for speakers to interact together. Written grammars have now become part of the equipment of every westernized mother faulting her daughter for defective manners of speech. Viewed in this way, every academic office—the anthropologist’s den, the physiologist’s lab, the lawyer’s library, the social theorist’s study, the architect’s studio, the consultant’s office—begins to take, in the observer’s account, a star-like shape with a center surrounded by many radiating lines with all sorts of tiny conduits leading to and fro. The Wolf of Context could gulp down an interaction, but not such a long, flat, folded net in which he would instead find himself fully ensnared.

Provided we follow such a lead without flinching, a new topographical relationship becomes visible between the former micro and the former macro. The macro is neither ‘above’ nor ‘below’ the interactions, but added to them as another of their connections, feeding them and feeding off of them. There is no other known way to achieve changes in relative scale. For each of the ‘macro places’, the same type of questions can be raised. The answer provided by fieldwork will bring attention back to a local site and re-describe them as some disheveled arrays of connections through which vehicles (carrying types of documents, inscriptions, and materials) are traveling via some sort of conduit.

What was true, at the end of Part I, of the sociologists’ written account, is true of all the other structure-makers as well: all of them are launching tiny bridges to overcome the gaps created by disparate frames of reference. The precise nature of those moving entities is not important at this point: the enquiry will decide what are the vehicles and what are the documents for each case. What counts is the possibility for the enquirer to register that kind of ‘networky’ shape wherever possible, instead of having to cut off data in two heaps: one local, one global. To tell an actor-network story is to be able to capture those many connections without bungling them from the start by some a priori decision over what is the ‘true size’ of an interaction or of some social aggregate. As should be clear by now, ANT is first of all an abstract projection principle for deploying any shape, not some concrete arbitrary decision about which shape should be on the map.

Centers of calculation, as I have called them, offer such a star-like shape in a very striking form.[^229] Capitalism, for instance, may be an intractable entity endowed with a ‘spirit’, but a Wall Street trading room does connect to the ‘whole world’ through the tiny but expeditious conduits of millions of bits of information per second, which, after having been digested by traders, are flashed back to the very same place by the Reuters or Bloomberg trading screens that register all of the transactions and are then wired to the ‘rest of the (connected) world’ to determine someone’s net worth.[^230] Once those conduits are taken into account, we now have a choice between two routes: we can still believe that capitalism acts surreptitiously as the ‘infrastructure’ of all the world’s transactions and, if so, we have to jump from the local assessment of a specific company’s worth to its ‘context’, changing vehicles as we go along, shifting gears and flying into stratospheric considerations instead of walking on foot. Or we can continue doing the footwork and study places such as the Wall Street trading room without changing vehicles, just to see where this decision will lead us. The landscape drawn in both cases, using these two definitions of tracers, will be completely different.

And so will the leeway left for action: capitalism has no plausible enemy since it is ‘everywhere’, but a given trading room in Wall Street has many competitors in Shanghai, Frankfurt, and London—a computer breakdown, a sneaky movement by a competitor, an unexpected figure, a neglected variable in a pricing formula, a risky accounting procedure—that may shift the balance from an obscene profit to a dramatic loss. Yes, Wall Street is connected to many places and in this sense, but in this sense only, it is ‘bigger’, more powerful, overarching. However, it is not a wider, larger, less local, less interactive, less an inter-subjective place than the shopping center in Moulins, France or the noisy and smelly market stands in Bouake´, Ivory Coast. Don’t focus on capitalism, but don’t stay stuck on the screen of the trading room either: follow the connections, ‘follow the actors themselves’. No cold objectification has taken place there, no superior reason is being unfolded. Everywhere, blind termites are busy cranking out data. Just keep sniffing through their galleries, no matter how far this takes you.

The same change of topography occurs every time you replace some mysterious structure by fully visible and empirically traceable sites. An organization is certainly not ‘bigger’ than those it organizes. Since Bill Gates is not physically larger than all his Microsoft employees, Microsoft itself, as a corporate body, cannot be a vast building in which individual agents reside. Instead, there is a certain type of movement going through all of them, a few of which begin and end in Mr Gates’s office.[^231] It’s because an organization is even less a society than the body politic that it’s made only of movements, which are woven by the constant circulation of documents, stories, accounts, goods, and passions. For an office to be traversed by longer, faster, and more intense connections is not the same thing as being wider.[^232] To follow continuous trails is not the same as to jump to structure. To stick to the visible and the graspable is not the same as to gorge oneself with invisible agencies. To remain with one type of vehicle all along is not the same as accepting a ride from faster and fancier modes of transportation. There exists no place that can be said to be ‘non-local’. If something is to be ‘delocalized’, it means that it is being sent from one place to some other place, not from one place to no place. ‘Shouldn’t that be common sense?’ So mutters the same obsessively blind, trailfollowing ANT.

An actor-network is traced whenever, in the course of a study, the decision is made to replace actors of whatever size by local and connected sites instead of ranking them into micro and macro. The two parts are essential, hence the hyphen. The first part (the actor) reveals the narrow space in which all of the grandiose ingredients of the world begin to be hatched; the second part (the network) may explain through which vehicles, which traces, which trails, which types of information, the world is being brought inside those places and then, after having been transformed there, are being pumped back out of its narrow walls. This is why the hyphenated ‘network’ is not there as a surreptitious presence of the Context, but remains what connects the actors together. Instead of being, like Context, another dimension giving volume to a too narrow and flat description, it allows the relations to remain flat and to pay in full the bill for the ‘transaction costs’. It’s not that there are a macro-sociology and a micro-sociology, but that there are two different ways of envisaging the macro-micro relationship: the first one builds a series of Russian Matryoshka dolls— the small is being enclosed, the big is enclosing; and the second deploys connections—the small is being unconnected, the big one is to be attached.

It is not by accident that ANT started with the study of science. Whenever one looks for a telling example of what it could mean for a social theory to do away with the micro/macro distinction, scientific arrays offer an excellent template. Not only were they much easier to study, they also provided the most extreme examples of how small innovations could, in the end, become a ‘macro’ feature of the ‘whole’ world.[^233] Sciences have no size, or rather, if there is one thing that does not account well for their power, it is their diminutive size. It’s no accident that whenever Gabriel Tarde wanted to find a perfect example of his theory of ‘imitative rays’, it was to the (then non-existing) sociology of science that he chose to turn. There exists, he insisted, some indirect but fully traceable connection between Galileo’s cabinet in Florence in the 16th century and what every schoolboy learns when they are asked not to believe their eyes telling them that the sun is setting at dusk.[^234] Any laboratory scale is, potentially, immensely small or big. It would be foolish, on the observer’s part, to decide in advance and for good what its real size is. Scientific disciplines, including the little ‘cameral sciences’ such as accounting, management, and business organization provide marvelous examples because, like the fruit flies of geneticists, they offer us an exaggerated version of what occurs everywhere in a less clearly, traceable way. As we saw in Part I, the more science and technology develops, the easier it is to physically trace social connections. Satellites, fiber optic networks, calculators, data streams, and laboratories are the new material equipment that underline the ties as if a huge red pen was connecting the dots to let everyone see the lines that were barely visible before.[^235] But what is true for laboratories and offices is true for all the other connecting or structuring sites as well.

To designate this first category of landmarks, I propose to use the word oligopticon as the generic term, reserving the expression of ‘centers of calculation’ for the sites where literal and not simply metaphorical calculations are made possible by the mathematical or at least arithmetic format of the documents being brought back and forth.[^236] As every reader of Michel Foucault knows, the ‘panopticon’, an ideal prison allowing for a total surveillance of inmates imagined at the beginning of the 19th century by Jeremy Bentham, has remained a utopia, that is, a world of nowhere to feed the double disease of total paranoia and total megalomania.[^237] We, however, are not looking for utopia, but for places on earth that are fully assignable. Oligoptica are just those sites since they do exactly the opposite of panoptica: they see much too little to feed the megalomania of the inspector or the paranoia of the inspected, but what they see, they see it well—hence the use of this Greek word to designate an ingredient at once indispensable and that comes in tiny amounts (as in the ‘oligo-elements’ of your health store). From oligoptica, sturdy but extremely narrow views of the (connected) whole are made possible—as long as connections hold. Nothing it seems can threaten the absolutist gaze of panoptica, and this is why they are loved so much by those sociologists who dream to occupy the center of Bentham’s prison; the tiniest bug can blind oligoptica.

Sometimes, those sites are easy to pinpoint because physical connections do the tracing for us in the same way as with laboratories: it is obvious, for instance, that an army’s command and control center is not ‘bigger’ and ‘wider’ than the local front thousands of miles away where soldiers are risking their life, but it is clear nonetheless that such a war room can command and control anything—as the name indicates—only as long as it remains connected to the theater of operation through a ceaseless transport of information. So the right topography here is not to include the front line ‘into’ some overarching power, but to localize both and to connect through some sort of well-fed cables what in French is called connectique.[^238] This is what I mean by flattening the landscape. That this is not an easy task, every soldier, commander, and historian of battles knows all too well.[^239]

Sometimes the star-shaped oligoptica might be more difficult to detect: a newspaper editor’s cubicle resembles a command and control room but only a bit, since what goes out and what comes in is not as formatted and binding as a military order or a dispatch.[^240] In still other cases, the connections are barely visible, as when one is asking in which bureau is ‘Oedipus’ complex’, ‘governance’, ‘re-engineering’ or ‘social capital’ being produced. And yet, here again, trails could be followed and a map could be drawn of, for instance, the various contradictory social theories that travel through Paris. Even if they appear immaterial, they are physically transported over fieldwork, questionnaires, statistical bureaus, academic polemics, journal articles, bar conversations, and grant applications before making their way back through editorials, textbooks, party officials, strike committees, and war rooms, where they are put to use by some participants as a way to decide, in part, who they are and to which sort of group they pertain. As we learned from the first source of uncertainty, it is hard to pertain to a group nowadays without some help from a social scientist. What does anyone know about ‘cultural capital’, ‘methodological individualism’, ‘organizational inertia’, ‘downsizing’, ‘gender’, ‘the precautionary principle’ without first passing through some research center?[^241] In the case of such flimsy tracers, it might be more difficult to draw the map since the tracks might be fainter, the connections often interrupted. But it remains necessary to try in order to give the impression that we could be put ‘in a category’ at no cost.[^242]

To conclude on this first type of clamp: even though the question seems really odd at first—not to say in bad taste—whenever anyone speaks of a ‘system’, a ‘global feature’, a ‘structure’, a ‘society’, an ‘empire’, a ‘world economy’, an ‘organization’, the first ANT reflex should be to ask: ‘In which building? In which bureau? Through which corridor is it accessible? Which colleagues has it been read to? How has it been compiled?’[^243] Inquirers, if they accept to follow this clue, will be surprised at the number of sites and the number of conduits that pop up as soon as those queries are being raised. The social landscape begins to change rather quickly. And as travelers notice right away, it does not produce in them the same feeling as if they were asked to penetrate some intimidating overarching pyramid of power or scan the flattened landscape where many attempts at establishing and securing frail connections circulate. It’s this difference in topography that will explain (in the book’s concluding chapter) why the two social theories don’t aspire to the same sort of political relevance.

Panoramas

And yet, there is no reason to deny that the shadow of a huge social pyramid looms over our heads. It’s like a Pavlov reflex, a knee-jerk reaction. Whenever we speak of society, we imagine a massive monument or sphere, something like a huge cenotaph. There is a pecking order from top to bottom. So no matter how many warnings I could flash, every oligopticon used to hold the landscape flat will immediately be engulfed somewhere ‘into’ a larger social context as snuggly as a pigeon into its pigeon-hole. There is no way to fight this prejudice directly since it has been, for more than two centuries, the default position of our operational systems: society, no matter how it is construed to be, has to be something large in scale. And yet, it is just this default position that makes it impossible to deploy any relativist sociology.

The problem is that social scientists use scale as one of the many variables they need to set up before doing the study, whereas scale is what actors achieve by scaling, spacing, and contextualizing each other through the transportation in some specific vehicles of some specific traces.[^244] It is of little use to respect the actors’ achievements if in the end we deny them one of their most important privileges, namely that they are the ones defining relative scale. It’s not the analyst’s job to impose an absolute one. As every reader of relativity theory knows, absolute frames of reference generate only horrible deformations, spoiling any hope of superimposing documents in some readable format, while soft and slimy ‘mollusks of reference’ (Einstein’s term) allow physicists to travel from one frame to the next if not smoothly, then at least continuously.[^245] Either the sociologist is rigid and the world becomes a mess or the sociologist is pliable enough and the world puts itself in order. Here again the duties of empirical relativism are akin to those of morality.

It is because the prejudice of living inside an overarching framework is seemingly impossible to uproot that I have to devise a second type of artificial clamp. As long as we do not ferret out the places where ‘up’, ‘down’, ‘total’, and ‘global’ are so convincingly staged, the temptation to jump to the ‘context’ will not be alleviated and the actors’ scalemaking activity will never have room to be fully deployed. The social landscape will never be flattened enough for the cost of connecting vehicles to be made fully visible. People will go on believing that the big animal doesn’t need any fodder to sustain itself; that society is something that can stand without being produced, assembled, collected, or kept up; that it resides behind us, so to speak, instead of being ahead of us as a task to be fulfilled.

As we saw in the earlier part of the book, it is not the sociologist’s job to decide in the actor’s stead what groups are making up the world and which agencies are making them act. Her job is to build the artificial experiment—a report, a story, a narrative, an account—where this diversity might be deployed to the full. Even though it seems so odd at first, the same is true of scale: it is not the sociologist’s business to decide whether any given interaction is ‘micro’ while some other one would be ‘middle-range’ or ‘macro’. Too much investment, ingenuity, and energy is expended by participants into modifying the relative scale of all the other participants for sociologists to decide on a fixed standard. As Boltanski and The´venot have shown, if there is one thing you cannot do in the actor’s stead it is to decide where they stand on a scale going from small to big, because at every turn of their many attempts at justifying their behavior they may suddenly mobilize the whole of humanity, France, capitalism, and reason while, a minute later, they might settle for a local compromise.[^246] Faced with such sudden shifts in scale, the only possible solution for the analyst is to take the shifting itself as her data and to see through which practical means ‘absolute measure’ is made to spread.

Scale is the actor’s own achievement. Although this is the oldest and, in my view, the most decisive proposition made by ANT,[^247] I have never encountered anyone who could accept to even glance at the landscape thus revealed—no more, if I dare the parallel, than Galileo could tempt his ‘dear and respected colleagues’ to have a look through his makeshift telescope. The reason is that we tend to think of scale— macro, meso, micro—as a well-ordered zoom. It is a bit like the marvelous but perversely misleading book The Powers of Ten, where each page offers a picture one order of magnitude closer than the preceding one all the way from the Milky Way to the DNA fibers, with a photo somewhere in the middle range that shows two young picnickers on a lawn near Lake Superior.[^248] A microsecond of reflection is enough to realize that this montage is misleading—where would a camera be positioned to show the galaxy as a whole? Where is the microscope able to pin down this cell DNA instead of that one? What ruler could order pictures along such a regular trail? Nice assemblage, but perversely wrong. The same is true of the zooming effect in the social realm, except that, in this case, it is taken not as a clever artistic trick, but as a most natural injunction springing from the sturdiest common sense. Is it not obvious that IBM is ‘bigger’ than its sales force? That France is ‘wider’ than the School of Mines that is much ‘bigger’ than me? And if we imagine IBM and France as having the same star-like shape as the command and control war room I mentioned earlier, what would we make of the organizational charts of IBM’s corporate structure, of the map of France, of the picture of the whole Earth? Are they not obviously providing the vastly wider ‘framework’ into which ‘smaller things’ have to be ‘situated’? Does it not make perfect sense to say that Europe is bigger than France, which is bigger than Paris that is bigger than rue Danton and which is bigger than my flat? Or to say that the 20th century provides the frame ‘in which’ the Second World War has ‘taken place’? That the battle of Waterloo, in Stendhal’s The Charterhouse of Parma, is a vastly more important event than Fabrizio del Dongo’s experience of it? While readers might be ready to listen patiently to the claims of ANT for a new topography, they won’t take it any further if it goes too much against every commonsensical reaction. How could ‘putting things into a frame’ not be the most reasonable thing to do?

I agree that the point is to follow common sense. I also agree that framing things into some context is what actors constantly do. I am simply arguing that it is this very framing activity, this very activity of contextualizing, that should be brought into the foreground and that it cannot be done as long as the zoom effect is taken for granted. To settle scale in advance would be sticking to one measure and one absolute frame of reference only when it is measuring that we are after; when it is traveling from one frame to the next that we want to achieve. Once again, sociologists of the social are not abstract enough. They believe that they have to stick to common sense, although what demonstrates, on the contrary, a complete lack of reason is imagining a ‘social zoom’ without a camera, a set of rails, a wheeled vehicle, and all the complex teamwork which has to be assembled to carry out something as simple as a dolly shot. Any zoom of any sort that attempts to order matters smoothly like the set of Russian dolls is always the result of a script carefully planned by some stage manager. If you doubt it, then go visit Universal Studios. ‘Ups’ and ‘downs’, ‘local’ and ‘global’ have to be made, they are never given. We all know this pretty well, since we have witnessed many cases where relative size has been instantaneously reversed—by strikes, revolutions, coups, crises, innovations, discoveries. Events are not like tidy racks of clothes in a store. S, M, X, XL labels seem rather confusingly distributed; they wane and wax pretty fast; they shrink or enlarge at lightning speed. But we never seem ready to draw the consequences of our daily observations, so obsessed are we by the gesture of ‘placing things into their wider context’.

And yet this gesture should also be carefully documented! Have you ever noticed, at sociological conferences, political meetings, and bar palavers, the hand gestures people make when they invoke the ‘Big Picture’ into which they offer to replace what you have just said so that it ‘fits’ into such easy-to-grasp entities as ‘Late Capitalism’, ‘the ascent of civilization’, ‘the West’, ‘modernity’, ‘human history’, ‘Postcolonialism’, or ‘globalization’? Their hand gesture is never bigger than if they were stroking a pumpkin! I am at last going to show you the real size of the ‘social’ in all its grandeur: well, it is not that big. It is only made so by the grand gesture and by the professorial tone in which the ‘Big Picture’ is alluded to. If there is one thing that is not common sense, it would be to take even a reasonably sized pumpkin for the ‘whole of society’. Midnight has struck for that sort of social theory and the beautiful carriage has been transformed back into what it should always have remained: a member of the family Cucurbitaceae.

I am mean, I know, but sometimes it can be done in a friendly way like when a surgeon quickly removes a painful wart. Size and zoom should not be confused with connectedness. Either this pumpkin-size scale is related through many connections to many other sites, in the same way a trading room in Wall Street is to the many arrays making up world economies—and, if so, I want to be convinced that those connections exist, I want to touch the conduits, to check their solidity, to test their realism—or it is not related and, in this case, if there is one thing that this threatening gesture of the hands can’t do, it is to force me into believing that my small ‘local’ description has been ‘framed’ by something ‘bigger’. That’s right, I don’t want to be framed! But I am ready to study very carefully the framing itself, to turn it from such an automatic resource into a fascinating new topic. It is through the staging of the zoom effect that the social of social theorists enters the scene; that it claims to ‘embed’ local interactions; that it ends up gaining such a powerful grip over the mind of every actor. So powerful is it that when an alternative social theory offers to get rid of such a grip, it is as if God had died again—and indeed there is more than one common feature between the ever dying God of olden days and that position which the God-like sociologist sometimes dreams of occupying.

In effect, the Big Picture is just that: a picture. And then the question can be raised: in which movie theatre, in which exhibit gallery is it shown? Through which optics is it projected? To which audience is it addressed? I propose to call panoramas the new clamps by asking obsessively such questions. Contrary to oligoptica, panoramas, as etymology suggests, see everything. But they also see nothing since they simply show an image painted (or projected) on the tiny wall of a room fully closed to the outside. The metaphor comes from those early rooms invented in the early 19th century, whose descendants can be found in the Omnimax cinema rooms built near science centers and shopping malls.[^249] The Greek word pan, which means ‘everything’, does not signify that those pictures survey ‘the whole’ but that, on the contrary, they paper over a wall in a blind room on which a completely coherent scenery is being projected on a 3608 circular screen. Full coherence is their forte—and their main frailty.

Where can we find them now that all of the real panoramas made famous by Walter Benjamin have been destroyed? They are all over the place; they are being painted every time a newspaper editorialist reviews with authority the ‘whole situation’; when a book retells the origins of the world from the Big Bang to President Bush; when a social theory textbook provides a bird’s eye view of modernity; when the CEO of some big company gathers his shareholders; when some famous scientist summarizes for the benefit of the public ‘the present state of science’; when a militant explains to her cellmates the ‘long history of exploitation’; when some powerful architecture—a piazza, a skyscraper, a huge staircase—fills you with awe.[^250] Sometimes they are splendid achievements as in the Palazzo della Ragione in Padua (yes, the Palace of Reason!), where the large city hall is entirely covered by a fresco depicting a vision of the entire Classical and Christian mythology together with the calendar of all the trades and civic events. Sometimes they are only a rough pell-mell of cliche´s as in the convoluted plots of conspiracy theorists. Sometimes they are offer entirely new programs as when a new show is offered about the ‘end of history’, the ‘clash of civilizations’, or ‘risk society’. Sometimes they remake history when they propose a complete rereading of the Zeitgeist as in the Phenomenology of Spirit or The Communist Manifesto.

What is so powerful in those contraptions is that they nicely solve the question of staging the totality, of ordering the ups and downs, of nesting ‘micro’, ‘meso’, and ‘macro’ into one another. But they don’t do it by multiplying two-way connections with other sites—as command and control rooms, centers of calculation and, more generally, oligoptica do.[^251] They design a picture which has no gap in it, giving the spectator the powerful impression of being fully immersed in the real world without any artificial mediations or costly flows of information leading from or to the outside. Whereas oligoptica are constantly revealing the fragility of their connections and their lack of control on what is left in between their networks, panoramas gives the impression of complete control over what is being surveyed, even though they are partially blind and that nothing enters or leaves their walls except interested or baffled spectators. To confuse them with oligoptica would be like confusing a war episode monitored from the U.S. Army war room in Tampa, Florida, with the same one related on Fox News when a retired general is commenting on the ‘day at the front’. The first account, which is a realist one, knows painfully well that it can become unreal as soon as communications are cut off; the second one might be just as real but it has a smaller chance of telling us whether or not it’s fiction. Most of the time, it’s this excess of coherence that gives the illusion away.

Although these panoramas shouldn’t be taken too seriously, since such coherent and complete accounts may become the most blind, most local, and most partial viewpoints, they also have to be studied very carefully because they provide the only occasion to see the ‘whole story’ as a whole. Their totalizing views should not be despised as an act of professional megalomania, but they should be added, like everything else, to the multiplicity of sites we want to deploy.[^252] Far from being the place where everything happens, as in their director’s dreams, they are local sites to be added as so many new places dotting the flattened landscape we try to map. But even after such a downsizing, their role may become central since they allow spectators, listeners, and readers to be equipped with a desire for wholeness and centrality. It is from those powerful stories that we get our metaphors for what ‘binds us together’, the passions we are supposed to share, the general outline of society’s architecture, the master narratives with which we are disciplined. It is inside their narrow boundaries that we get our commonsensical idea that interactions occur in a ‘wider’ context; that there is a ‘up’ and a ‘down’; that there is a ‘local’ nested inside a ‘global’; and that there might be a Zeitgeist the spirit of which has yet to be devised.

The status of these panoramas is strangely ambiguous: they are simultaneously what vaccinates against totalization—since they are obviously local and constricted inside blind rooms—and what offers a foretaste for the one world to be lived in. They collect, they frame, they rank, they order, they organize; they are the source of what is meant by a well-ordered zoom. So, no matter how much they trick us, they prepare us for the political task ahead. Through their many clever special effects, they offer a preview of the collective with which they should not be confused. As we now begin to realize, there is always a danger to take the building of those panoramas for the much harder political task of progressively composing the common world. Watching the movies of social theories in those Omnimax rooms is one thing, doing politics is quite another. Durkheim’s ‘sui generis society’, Luhmann’s ‘autopoietic systems’, Bourdieu’s ‘symbolic economy of fields’, or Beck’s ‘reflexive modernity’ are excellent narratives if they prepare us, once the screening has ended, to take up the political tasks of composition; they are misleading if taken as a description of what is the common world. At best, panoramas provide a prophetic preview of the collective, at worst they are a very poor substitute for it. It’s one of the ambitions of ANT to keep the prophetic urge that has always been associated with the social sciences, but to accompany the master narratives safely back inside the rooms where they are displayed.[^253]

So here again, the voluntarily blind ANT scholar should keep asking the same mean and silly questions whenever a well-ordered pecking order between scales has been staged: ‘In which room? In which panorama? Through which medium? With which stage manager? How much?’ Active, sometimes even beautiful, complex sites will pop up at every corner as soon as this second interrogation is obsessively raised. If you are in doubt, try, as an exercise, to locate the places, the theaters, the stages where ‘globalization’ is being painted over. You will soon realize that, in spite of so much ‘globalonney’, globalization circulates along minuscule rails resulting in some glorified form of provincialism.[^254]

After ‘go slow’, the injunctions are now ‘don’t jump’ and ‘keep everything flat!’ The three pieces of advice reinforce one another, since it is only once the long distance between different points of the territory has been measured up that the full transaction costs to join them will have been reckoned. How could a walker assess in advance the time it will take to reach some mountaintop if the isometric lines had not first been drawn one by one? How could we discover the breadth of the political task ahead of us if distances between incommensurable viewpoints had not been fathomed first?

---

[^222]: See Jacques Pasteels and Jean-Louis Deneubourg (1987), From Individual to Collective Behavior in Social Insects and Deborah Gordon (1999), Ants At Work: How An Insect Society Is Organized.

[^223]: For an up-to-date attempt at spatializing science, see David N. Livingstone (2003), Putting Science in Its Place: Geographies of Scientific Knowledge.

[^224]: See Sylvain Auroux (1999), La raison, le langage et les normes.

[^225]: See Martha Mundy and Alain Pottage (2004), Law, Anthropology and the Constitution of the Social: Making Persons and Things and Bruno Latour (2002), La fabrique du droit - Une ethnographie du Conseil d’Etat.

[^226]: For a materialist account of anthropology making, see the classic works of George W. Stocking (ed.) (1983), Observers Observed: Essays on Ethnographic Fieldwork; Bourdieu, Outline; and Goody The Domestication of the Savage Mind.

[^227]: Even ‘vast’ master narratives may be produced in these ‘local’ places. See Michael Lynch and David Bogen (1996), The Spectacle of History: Speech, Text and Memory at the Iran Contra Hearings.

[^228]: See Simon Winchester (2003), The Meaning of Everything: The Story of the Oxford English Dictionary.

[^229]: For a definition of the term, see Bruno Latour (1987), Science In Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society.

[^230]: See Karin Knorr-Cetina and Urs Bruegger (2002), ‘Global Microstructures: The Virtual Societies of Financial Markets’; Muniesa, Des marche´s comme algorithmes; Donald MacKenzie (forthcoming), An engine, not a camera: finance theory and the making of markets; Le´pinay ‘Les formules du marche´’; Mirowski Machine Dreams; Andrew Leyshon and Nigel Thrift (1996), Money/Space: Geographies of Monetary Transformation; and, although a century old, Tarde Psychologie e´conomique.

[^231]: Strangely enough, this is true of the building itself in spite of the metaphor of structure, since no building is ever visible in toto at any point of its construction and use. See Edward Robbins (1994), Why Architects Draw and for an ethnography of scaling, Albena Yaneva (2005), ‘Scaling Up and Down: Extraction Trials in Architectural Design’.

[^232]: A stunning example of the fecundity of this approach is offered by the airport project led by Goodwin and Suchman. See Franc¸oise Brun-Cottan et al. (1991), The workplace project: Designing for diversity and change and Goodwin and Goodwin Formulating Planes.

[^233]: The office at the School of Mines is the birthplace of Schlumberger’s early oil detection attempts. On this remarkable story, see Geffrey Bowker (1994), Science on the Run: Information Management and Industrial Geographics at Schlumberger, 1920–1940. On the power of network expansion, the classic story remains Hughes, Networks of Power. See also the beautiful example of Indian colonialism in Daniel R. Headrick (1988), The Tentacles of Progress: Technology Transfer in the Age of Imperialism, 1850–1940.

[^234]: ‘When a young peasant, observing the sunset, is at a loss whether to believe his schoolmaster, who assures him that the fall of night is due to the motion of the earth and not to the motion of the sun, or the testimony of his senses, which tell him the contrary, in such a case there is but a single imitative ray, which, reaching out through his schoolmaster, unites him with Galileo; nevertheless this is sufficient to render his hesitation, his own internal opposition, social in origin.’ In Tarde, Social Laws, p. 51.

[^235]: This is even more true today with quantitative tools. See Peter Keating and Alberto Cambrosio (2003), Biomedical Platforms: Realigning the Normal and the Pathological in LateTwentieth-Century Medicine.

[^236]: The close study of formalism enables one to distinguish between the two situations. See Claude Rosental (2003), La Trame de l’e´vidence; David Kaiser (2005), Drawing Theories Apart: The Dispersion of Feynman Diagrams in Postwar Physics; and, on the other hand, the study of files and bureaucrats in Christian Jacob (1992), L’empire des cartes. Approche the´orique de la cartographie a` travers l’histoire. Suchman uses the expression ‘centers of coordination’ to insist on the practicalities of the workplace, which she takes to be a hybrid space of forms, calculations, techniques of organizations, and interactions. See Brun-Cottan, The Workplace Project.

[^237]: It’s clear that Bentham himself was more than infected by both diseases. See Je´re´my Bentham and Michel Foucault (1977), Le Panopticon pre´ce´de´ de l’oeil du pouvoir: entretien avec Michel Foucault. It’s less clear in the case of Foucault’s ironical use of the utopia of the panopticon in Michel Foucault (1975), Discipline and Punish: The Birth of Prison.

[^238]: Many examples of this fragility can be found in Barry Political Machines. For a science studies analysis of bureaucracy at work, see Alberto Cambrosio, Camille Limoges and Denyse Pronovost (1990), ‘Representing biotechnology: an ethnography of Quebec Science Policy’.

[^239]: For a masterly demonstration, see John Keegan (1987), The Mask of Command. The recent dispute over weapons of mass destruction offers a stunning example of the limits of all the metaphors of ‘gaze’ and ‘vision’, see Hans Blix (2004), Disarming Iraq. However, the literary masterpiece remains Tolstoy’s War and Peace.

[^240]: For some classical examples, see Walter Lippmann (1922), Public Opinion, on journals; Chandler The Visible Hand about companies; and Peter Miller (1994), ‘The Factory as Laboratory’ on accounting.

[^241]: A good example of this is Boltanski and Chiapelllo, The New Spirit of Capitalism when they use management literature as their guide to understand how companies make use of new social theories—including ANT. . .

[^242]: See Luc Boltanski (1987), The Making of a Class: Cadres in French Society and the early work of The´venot on socio-economic category making, especially his classic Laurent The´venot (1984), ‘Rules and Implements: Investment in Forms’.

[^243]: Anke te Heesen (2004), ‘Things that talk: News, Paper, Scissors. Clippings in the Sciences and Arts around 1920’.

[^244]: Those traces are specified in the third move. Once more, patience is requested here.

[^245]: I have always considered, somewhat infamously, Einstein as a social theorist, that is, as a theorist of associations. See Bruno Latour (1988c), ‘A Relativist Account of Einstein’s Relativity’.

[^246]: Boltanski and The´venot, On Justification.

[^247]: See Michel Callon and Bruno Latour (1981), ‘Unscrewing the Big Leviathans. How Do Actors Macrostructure Reality’.

[^248]: Philip Morrison and Phylis Morrison (1982), The Powers of Ten.

[^249]: On the history of this 19th century media, see Stephan Oettermann (1997), The Panorama: History of a Mass Medium; Bernard Comment (2003), The Panorama; and of course Walter Benjamin (2002), The Arcades Project.

[^250]: On the link between architecture and power, see Jean-Philippe Heurtin (1999), L’espace public parlementaire: Essais sur les raisons du le´gislateur.

[^251]: Sloterdijk has offered a description of many panoramas under the name of ‘globes’ in Peter Sloterdijk (1999), Spha¨ren. Bd.2 Globen.

[^252]: John Tresch has shown how many of those collecting devices exist in a given historical situation and how they can produce what he calls cosmograms. See John Tresch (2001), ‘Mechanical Romanticism: Engineers of the Artificial Paradise’. This multiplicity disappears as soon as they are put inside a coherent Zeitgeist instead of being followed in their contradictory circulations—more on this in the section dealing with collecting statements p. 221.

[^253]: The critique of Master Narratives and the appeal to multiplicity, fragmentation, and little narratives becomes moot once panoramas are added to the landscape: multiplicity is not in short supply. To limit oneself to it might also mean that the political task of assembling has been abandoned.

[^254]: On the localization of the global, see especially the work of Stephan Harrison, Steve Pile and Nigel Thrift (2004), Patterned Ground: Entanglements of Nature and Culture.
