# Second Move: Redistributing the Local

_Source pages: 202–229_

By equipping inquirers’ toolboxes with different instruments (oligopticas and panoramas), we have allowed them to localize the global and to accompany it safely back inside the circuits in which it now circulates back and forth. Whenever the urge to go away from local interactions manifested itself, and instead of trying some salto mortale toward the invisible rear-world of the social context, I proposed to trudge toward the many local places where the global, the structural, and the total were being assembled and where they expand outward thanks to the laying down of specific cables and conduits. If you keep doing this long enough, the same effects of hierarchy and asymmetry that before were visible will now emerge out of strings of juxtaposed localities. Since they are pinpointed inside the many oligoptica and panoramas, there is nothing wrong any more with using the word ‘contexts’. The vehicles that transport their effects have number plates and well-written labels, much like moving vans. From time to time, contexts are gathered, summed up, and staged inside specific rooms into coherent panoramas adding their many contradictory structuring effects to the sites to be ‘contextualized’ and ‘structured’.

Needless to say, there exists no other place in which to sum up all those sites—at least not yet. So it would be quite foolish to ask ‘in which’ super-mega-macro-structure they all reside—in the same way as it has become wholly irrelevant to try to detect, after relativity theory, the ether wind ‘through which’ the Earth passes. There exists no global all-encompassing place where, for instance, the control room of the Strategic Air Command, the Wall Street floor, the water pollution map, the census bureau, the Christian Coalition, and the United Nations would be gathered and summed up. And if someone tries to do so—as I am doing here in this paragraph—it is another place, another circuitous route loosely connected to the others with no claim to ‘embed’ or ‘know’ them. If a place wishes to dominate all the others for good, that’s just fine. But it will have to pay for every item of paraphernalia necessary to reach every one of the other places it purports to sum up, and to establish with it some sort of continuous, costly, two-way relation—if it doesn’t foot the bill to the last cent, it becomes a panorama. Even though Leibniz never specified it, for one monad to reflect the dim presence of all the others, some extra work is necessary.

But re-contextualizing context is only part of the job of getting accustomed again to walking on foot inside a flattened landscape. We still have the problem of understanding why we said earlier that interactions were such a dissatisfying starting point because of the number of other ingredients already in place. The reflex of social scientists that led them away from interactions—and which pushed them to look behind, above, or beneath for some other sites of activity—might have been badly directed, but it is still a valid insight. If we understood the first move as a plea to give some privilege to ‘local interactions’, then we have not gained very much.

Sticking obstinately to the ‘localize the global’ slogan does not explain what ‘local’ is, especially if action, as we have witnessed many times earlier, is so clearly ‘dislocated’. On the contrary, everything would be lost if, after having revamped the former ‘global context’, we had to fall back on this other preferred site of social science: the face-to-face encounter between individual, intentional, and purposeful human beings. If the one-way trip from interactions to context led nowhere, as we have just seen, the return trip back to local sites has no reason to be directed at a more accurate target. Far from reaching at last the concrete ground of a ‘social hypostasis’, we would have simply gone from one artifact to another.[^255] If the global has no concrete existence—except when it is brought back to its tiny conduits and onto its many stages—neither has the local. So we now have to ask exactly the same question as earlier, but in reverse: How is the local itself being generated? This time it is not the global that is going to be localized, it is the local that has to be re-dispatched and redistributed.

The reason why it’s so important to practice this symmetric operation is that once both corrective movements are done in succession, another entirely different phenomenon will move to the foreground: our attention will begin to concentrate on the ‘connectors’ that will then, and then only, be allowed to freely circulate without ever stopping at a place called ‘context’ or ‘interaction’. When the two moves are carried out together, the social world will begin to transform itself for good; it will take a new and more plausible shape—a shape that allows one to travel without sudden hiccups, a shape that might lend itself to the later work of assembling, collecting, and composing.

Articulators and localizers

To say that every local interaction is ‘shaped’ by many elements already in place, doesn’t tell us anything about the origin of those elements. And yet we have now verified where they don’t come from: they are not oozing out of a global context, of an overarching framework, of a deep structure. We just went there; there is nothing to be seen except the shadow of the body politic—which is to be reserved for later. Although purely negative, this result clears the way rather nicely. We are now free to search for the existence of another more continuous, more empirically traceable path to reach the places where the ingredients entering into interactions appear to come from. And sure enough, if no label, barcode, certificate of origin, or trademark is able to help us follow the ‘actors themselves’, there exists what is called in the industry an excellent traceability between the sites of production of local interactions, provided we don’t forget the lesson of Part I and make good use of all the sources of uncertainty.

The meandering path through which most of the ingredients of action reach any given interaction is traced by the multiplication, enrollment, implication, and folding of non-human actors. If the analyst is not allowed to exert some right of pursuit through multiple types of agencies, then the whole question of local and global becomes intractable. But as soon as non-human agents are brought in, another set of connections appears which are as different to those deployed in the preceding section as veins are to neural pathways.[^256] The powerful insight that most of the ingredients of the situation are ‘already’ in place, that we simply ‘occupy’ a predetermined position ‘inside’ some preformatted order, is always due to the transportation of a site into another one at another time, which is produced by someone else through subtle or radical changes in the ways new types of non-social agencies are mobilized. Others’ actions continue to be carried out at some distance, but through the relay of new types of mediators. Paradoxically, it’s only once it’s allowed to percolate through non-social agencies that the social becomes visible.

This process of delegation, dislocation, and translation is never clearer than in the role of material objects—provided we understand ‘matter’ in the extended sense given earlier (see p. 109). When we talk about an ‘overarching framework’, ‘pillars’, ‘infrastructure’, ‘frame’, we use loosely the technical terms borrowed from architecture, metallurgy, and cinema. Why not take literally what it means for an interaction to frame, to structure, or to localize another? As long as we use those metaphors in a muted form, we don’t see what could connect a place to another via a template. We may continue to believe that leaving a local scene could really mean jumping into the context, or that all of the ingredients of local interactions have to be improvised on the spot through social skills.[^257] But as soon as we activate the technical metaphors for good, the connections between sites become visible, even though they are made of many different types of stuff. This heterogeneity, however, no longer represents for us a difficulty since we have learned how to render commensurable various incommensurable materials. We know that objects have the strange capacity of being at once compatible with social skills during certain crucial moments and then totally foreign to any human repertoire of action. This flip-flop renders the inquiry more difficult but not enough to break the newly spun social we use as our Ariadne thread. In effect, what has been designated by the term ‘local interaction’ is the assemblage of all the other local interactions distributed elsewhere in time and space, which have been brought to bear on the scene through the relays of various non-human actors. It is the transported presence of places into other ones that I call articulators or localizers.[^258]

If, to take a trivial enough example, you sit in a chair in a lecture hall surrounded by well-ordered tiers of students listening to you in an amphitheater, I need only half a day’s work in the university archives to find out that fifteen years ago and two hundred kilometers away an architect, whose name I have found and whose exploratory scale models I have ferreted out, has drawn the specifications of this place down to the centimeter. She had no precise idea that you would be lecturing out loud today, and yet she anticipated, in a gross way, one aspect of such a scene’s script: you will have to be heard when you speak; you will sit at the podium; you will face a number of students whose maximum number, space requirements, etc. must be taken into consideration. No wonder that, fifteen years later, when you enter this scene, you feel that you have not made it all up and that most of what you need to act is already in place. Of course, the space has in fact been tailored for you—the generic you, that is, a large part of you.

Sure enough, no aspect of this structure—and now I can use the term without qualms because there is nothing hidden or discontinuous about it—‘determines’ what you are going to say, nor even where you will sit. You might decide to stand up, to walk up and down the alleys, or to play the role of the May 1968 rebellious teacher by reassembling the chairs to form a less ‘authoritarian’ circle—and nothing can stop the students from falling asleep as soon as you open your mouth. But just because some material element of the place does not ‘determine’ an action doesn’t mean you can conclude that they do nothing. We are now familiar with many more ontological stages than the two foolish extremes of being and nothingness. Fathom for one minute all that allows you to interact with your students without being interfered too much by the noise from the street or the crowds outside in the corridor waiting to be let in for another class. If you doubt the transporting power of all those humble mediators in making this a local place, open the doors and the windows and see if you can still teach anything. If you hesitate about this point, try to give your lecture in the middle of some art show with screaming kids and loud speakers spewing out techno music. The result is inescapable: if you are not thoroughly ‘framed’ by other agencies brought silently on the scene, neither you nor your students can even concentrate for a minute on what is being ‘locally’ achieved. In other words, what would happen if inter-subjectivity was obtained for good by removing, one after the other, all traces of inter-objectivity?

In many cases, it is fairly easy to establish some continuous connections that are open to scrutiny between the dreams and drawings of someone else, at some other time, in some other place, and whatever you and your students are now doing locally, face-to-face. This local site has been made to be a place by some other locus through the now silent mediation of drawings, specifications, wood, concrete, steel, varnish, and paint; through the work of many workers and artisans who have now deserted the scene because they let objects carry their action in absentia; through the agency of alumni whose generous deeds might be rewarded by some bronze plaque. Locals are localized. Places are placed.[^259] And to remain so, myriads of people, behind the doors, have to keep up the premises so that you can remain, you along with your students, safely ‘in it’. Far from offering some primordial autochthony which would be ‘so much more concrete’ than abstract contexts, faceto-face interactions should be taken, on the contrary, as the terminus point of a great number of agencies swarming toward them.

Although there is no ‘underlying hidden structure’, this is not to say that there doesn’t exist structuring templates circulating through channels most easily materialized by techniques—paper techniques and, more generally, intellectual technologies being as important as gears, levers, and chemical bonds. To the inter-subjective relation between you and your students, one should add the inter-objectivity that has dislocated actions so much that someone else, from some other place and some other time, is still acting in it through indirect but fully traceable connections.[^260] That does not mean that this faraway site is part of some mysterious context. It simply reveals between these two places—the architect’s studio and this classroom today—another circuitry through which masses of entities begin to circulate. Even more than after the first corrective move, one now finds in the foreground the vehicles, the movements, the shifts, and the translation between loci rather than the loci themselves. Places do not make for a good starting point, since every one of them are framed and localized by others—including of course the architect’s studio that I chose as the provisional origin for my example. We now understand why we had to start, according to Horace’s famous expression, in the middle of things, in medias res. Circulation is first, the landscape ‘in which’ templates and agents of all sorts and colors circulate is second. This is probably the oldest intuition of the social sciences, what made us exclaim that the social was an objective, transcendent, ubiquitous, sui generis phenomenon. As usual, the intuition was right but it was difficult to register as long as the circulation of the social was confused with the emergence of a society—itself mixed up with the body politic.

That scale does not depend on absolute size but on the number and qualities of dispatchers and articulators is what I had learned many years ago when I had the chance to follow Shirley Strum and her baboons. When I met her at the first ever ‘baboon conference’ held in a luxurious castle near New York City, she was a young researcher who had managed to habituate wild monkeys to her close and regular presence. Earlier observers, who watched baboons from afar and from the safe haven of a jeep, had detected a lot of interesting features, but they had situated agonistic encounters ‘inside’ absent structures— applying to the baboons the stock-in-trade of human sociology.

Animal societies were said to possess, for instance, a rigid dominance pattern ‘in which’ males had to enter. During this conference, Strum was trying to demonstrate that the dominance ‘structure’ was not something which male baboons were trying to find, but a question all animals raised by testing one another through carefully managed agonistic encounters.[^261] In other words, Strum as well as young males moving in the troops were raising the same basic questions about what it meant to generate some social structuring effects.[^262]

And both were slowly discovering, by a series of trials, that it was the females and not the males that were weaving, through daily interactions, a pretty solid kind of dominance order that had remained invisible to the (mostly male) observers too far removed to detect those subtle trials. So I was, in effect, following in this beautiful Kenyan landscape a sort of Garfinkel primatologist as she tried to make sense of baboons whom she was gently moving out of their perennial role of ‘cultural dopes’ so that they could graduate to the new reflexive actions of competent members. In a word, baboons were smart, socially smart.[^263]

If there was one social theory mistake not to make, it would be act as if baboons had found a role inside a preexisting structure. But it would be just as wrong to suppose that they were simply interacting with one another. Those furry little beasts were doing just as much social labor as their observers and were living in a world just as complex. And yet, there was a clear difference of equipment. The same basic job of testing, achieving, and generating all the ingredients of social life was done, in one case, with ‘social tools’ only, while the human observer was additionally equipped with materials and intellectual technologies. The primates had to decipher the meaning of the interactions with no other tools than the interactions themselves: they had to decide who was friend and enemy, who was displacing whom, who was leading whom, and who was ready to enter in a coalition by using the basic resource of trying and grooming, more grooming and trying. If they kept records, those records had to be ‘inscribed’ on their own bodies by their own bodies. It was the primatologist who had to rely on written names, statistical charts, notebooks, documentation, blood samples, genetic fingerprints, and visual aids of all sorts. They were achieving the same job of making a social order hold but with vastly different resources. The question then became tantalizing: What’s the difference between monkeys and humans if there is no longer a gap dividing nature and culture, instinct and reflection, ‘cultural dope’ and competent intentional agents? In Strum’s description, baboons were getting perilously close to humans, and yet I was not prepared, in spite of the title of her book, to consider myself ‘almost’ a baboon. Or rather, everything now depended on what is meant by this little ‘almost’.

Superficially, we could say that the obvious difference resides in technology. Baboons are not utterly deprived of stabilizing tools. But the point is that even though the males show off their formidable canines and the females parade their irresistible (to the males) swollen bottoms, the baboons still have to maintain their force through even more social skills. Chimpanzees have some tools, but baboons only have their ‘social tools’, namely their bodies which are slowly transformed by years of constant seduction, grooming, and communal life. In a sense, baboon troops could really offer the ideal natural experiment to check what happens when social connections are strictly limited to social skills. In this case, no technology of any sort is available to the participants in order to ‘build’ the ‘superstructure’ of their ‘society’. Since those architectural terms are completely metaphorical for them as well as for the observer, the baboons have to spend what seems like an inordinate amount of time to repair the shaky ‘building’ of society, to constantly fix its wobbling hierarchies, to ceaselessly re-establish who is leading whom into foraging forays. They can never rest, nor act on each other at a distance. When they do, it is through the highly complex medium of even subtler inter-subjective coalitions. The ways in which baboons have to repair every morning their fast decaying social order remains visible because of the fewer tools at their disposal. Baboons glue the social with ever more complex social interactions while we use interactions that are slightly less social and in a way slightly less complex, even though they may be more complicated, that is, made of even more folds.[^264]

But there might be another way to use this marvelous example of non-human primates as a sort of theoretical baseline. One of the conclusions we could draw is that a face-to-face interaction is not a plausible departure point to trace social connections for both humans and monkeys because in both cases they are being constantly interfered with by other agencies. In both cases, action is dislocated, diffracted, re-dispatched and redistributed, not to mention that it has to rely on successive layers of mediations piled on top of one another. Baboons, too, use some type of ‘intellectual technology’: their home range, the life history of each interaction, the trajectory of friendships and coalitions, the built-in variations of sizes, sex, anatomical features, etc. It’s this constant interference by the action of others that makes life in a baboon group an environment just as selective, just as pressing, and just as taxing as the one made of resources and predators. A baboon that is not socially smart is selected out just as swiftly if it doesn’t find food or can’t mate. Humans have lived in an environment as taxing, as selective, and as pressing but which is made up of even more mediators, dispatchers, and ‘dislocators’ that render local interactions even less local.[^265] If context was an impossible starting point, so are face-toface interactions. The difference is no longer between ‘simple’ baboons and highly ‘complex’ humans, but rather between complex baboons who have folded themselves into many entities—landscape, predators, groups—and complicated humans who have folded themselves into vastly more entities, some of them having the great advantage of remaining in place, thus simplifying, locally at least, the task of ordering. In humans more so than in monkeys, interference, dispatching, delegation, and articulation are visible and should offer us, in place of local face-to-face interactions, an excellent point of departure.

The implausible locus of face-to-face interactions[^266]

Because of the powerful feeling that interactions are ‘more concrete’, it might be easier for the reader to get rid of the global than the local. As we have seen in reviewing the second source of uncertainty, the same actant may be given different figurations (see p. 57). Although individualized characters might be granted more plausibility because of our habits of reading stories, it requires exactly the same semiotic labor, if I can use this expression, to produce a character as it does a concept or a corporate body. So, while we should remain attuned to small differences in figuration, there is no reason to forget that our own relativistic frame of reference should be indifferent to scale. But it remains true that beliefs in the indisputable existence of individuals is so entrenched, in our western climes at least, that people are only too ready to accept that, even though abstractions like structure, context, First, no interaction is what could be called isotopic. What is acting at the same moment in any place is coming from many other places, many distant materials, and many faraway actors. If we wanted to project on a standard geographical map the connections established between a lecture hall and all the places that are acting in it at the same time, we would have to draw bushy arrows in order to include, for instance, the forest out of which the desk is coming, the management office in charge of classroom planning, the workshop that printed the schedule that has helped us find the room, the janitor that tends the place, and so on.[^267] And this would not be some idle exercise, since each of these faraway sites has, in some indispensable way, anticipated and preformatted this hall by transporting, through many different sorts of media, the mass of templates that have made it a suitable local—and that are still propping it up.

Second, no interaction is synchronic. The desk might be made of a tree seeded in the 1950s that was felled two years ago; the cloth of the teacher’s dress was woven five years ago, while the firing of neurons in her head might be a millisecond old and the area of the brain devoted to speech has been around for a good hundred thousands years (or maybe less, this is, hotly disputed question among paleontologists). As to the words she uses, some have been introduced into English from foreign languages four hundred years ago, while this rule of grammar might be even older; the metaphor she chooses is just six years old and this rhetoric trope straight out of Cicero; but the computer keyboard she has typed her speech on is fresh from Apple, although the heavy metals making possible the coordination of some of its switches Third, interactions are not synoptic. Very few of the participants in a given course of action are simultaneously visible at any given point. The lecturer might believe she is center stage, but that does not mean that many others are not acting as well, only that there is no way to sum them up. The wooden desk was not part of the lecture before she pointed it out as an example of design, and yet it does something; it is one of the ingredients that helps put it into shape, allowing interaction to be framed. So was the slip of paper that advertised the lecture and set the appointed time and space even though she did not highlight it. But if we wanted all the ingredients of this scene to stand up and be counted, we will not be able to do it because there is no way to underline all of them at once, either because there are too many or because they are part of complicated machineries that are necessarily hidden if playing their part as efficient intermediaries. How many distinct entities in this microphone? In this body? In this school’s organization? You will never get the same count, no matter how many times you do the counting, because every time different agents will be made visible while others will have become dormant.

Fourth, interactions are not homogeneous. We have already understood this point earlier, since the relays through which action is carried out do not have the same material quality all along. How many successive shifts in agencies should we have to detect if we wanted to move from the architect’s cabinet, fifteen years ago, to the lecture hall? When slides are projected on the screen, how many different successive ingredients are necessary when some writing on a keyboard becomes digitalized, then transformed again in an analogical signal before being retransformed in some sort of slower brain wave into the mind of half-asleep students? What is staggering in any given interaction is exactly the opposite of what sociologists with a tropism for ‘local sites’ find so great in finally reaching face-to-face encounters, namely the crowd of non-human, non-subjective, nonlocal participants who gather to help carry out the course of action and transport it through channels that do not resemble a social tie, even though all of them are associated together.

Fifth, interactions are not isobaric, if I am allowed to borrow a metaphor from the lines of equal pressures that we read in weather maps when looking for depressions or anticyclones. Some of the participants are pressing very strongly, requesting to be heard and taken into account, while others are fully routine customs sunk rather mysteriously into bodily habits. Others are black-boxed into some hardware known only by engineers in faraway places in Asia and, very vaguely, by some techie from the maintenance staff somewhere on campus. Especially important are the different pressures exerted by mediators and intermediaries, the later adding, as we know, predictability to the setting, while the former might suddenly make it bifurcate in unexpected ways. At every point during the lecture, something could break, be it the microphone, the speaker, perhaps even the teacher. If any of the intermediaries mutates into a mediator, then the whole set up, no matter how solemn or controlled, may become unpredictable.

No wonder interactions provided social scientists with the strong impression that they were overflowing in all directions. They are! That does not mean that some solid overarching context holds them solidly in place through the grip of some hidden structural force. It means that a bewildering array of participants is simultaneously at work in them and which are dislocating their neat boundaries in all sorts of ways, redistributing them away and making it impossible to start anywhere that can be said to be ‘local’. Relativity in the social sciences would be a rather simple affair if we had simply to localize the global; it becomes relevant only when it is the solid ground of the local that vanishes. In most situations, actions will already be interfered with by heterogeneous entities that don’t have the same local presence, don’t come from the same time, are not visible at once, and don’t press upon them with the same weight. The word ‘interaction’ was not badly chosen; only the number and type of ‘actions’ and the span of their ‘inter’ relations has been vastly underestimated. Stretch any given inter-action and, sure enough, it becomes an actor-network.

The exception, of course, is if we fall back into loose talk and abandon the arduous task of following all the interferences. In that case it is perfectly all right to speak of ‘structure’ and ‘face-to-face interaction’. But this means that we are dealing with more routine situations and are using a pre-relativist frame of reference. In such an abbreviated manner of speech, a ‘structure’ is simply an actor-network on which there is scant information or whose participants are so quiet that no new information is required. An ‘interaction’ is a site so nicely framed by localizers behaving as intermediaries that it can be viewed, without too much trouble, as ‘taking place locally’.

When you go through this list of features that face-to-face interaction cannot possibly offer, you remain suspicious of the efforts made to root sociology into inter-subjective interactions, individual But if we follow the trails left behind by non-human actors, we understand where the right impression of being ‘framed’ comes from. Every local site is being localized by a flood of localizers, dispatchers, deviators, articulators—whatever word we want to choose. The role of inter-objectivity is to introduce in local interactions some fundamental dislocation. What could be the meaning of relative scale without inter-objectivity? How would we know we are small participants in a ‘wider’ scheme of things if we were not walking, for instance, inside the deep and dark canyons carved inside the massive features of some skyscrapers? Feeling small largely depends on how many other people, distributed in time and space, have preformed a place for the anonymous visitor now traveling, for instance, through the streets of New York City. Size is relative indeed—relative to the care with which it was designed and the care with which it is still enforced. But that does not mean we really are small participants ‘inside’ some framework. How long do we need to be reminded of this painful lesson? The saddest experimental proof was recently provided when a group of fanatics, equipped with nothing more than paper cutters, undid what many others had so carefully constructed and destroyed buildings in such a way that, although the dark shadow of death remains, the long and oppressing shade that the Twin Towers had projected onto the narrow streets was removed in the space of a few hours. After such an event, should we not be extraordinarily sensitive to the frailty of scale?

Constructing relative scale has a completely different meaning if we take it as a loose metaphor to ‘express’, ‘reproduce’, and ‘reflect’ the always present ‘social structure’, or if there is no other way to build anything bigger than through the medium of architecture and technology in its literal sense. In the traditional version of social theory, society is strong and nothing can destroy it since it is sui generis; in the other, it is so weak that it has to be built, repaired, fixed and, above all, taken care of. These two maps of the social drawn with different social tracers lead to two completely different esthetics, ethics, and politics— in addition to generating very different accounts.

Plug-ins

No place dominates enough to be global and no place is self-contained enough to be local. As long as we try to use either local interaction or structure, or some compromise between the two, there is no chance to trace social connections—and the cleverer the compromise, the worse it would be, since we would simply extend the lease of two nonexisting sites. On the contrary, I am trying here to be as dumb as possible and multiply clamps to make sure we resist the temptation to cut away in two boxes—global and local—what actors are doing, interrupting at once the deployment of their many fragile and sometimes bizarre itineraries. If we stick enough of these clamps firmly in place, we begin to draw another landscape which cuts through the former pathways going from the local to the global and back, and that runs, so to speak, transversally to all of them as if, through some odd cartographic operation, we had slowly morphed the hydrological map of some water catchments into another one. It is as if we had made a west flowing river run along a north-south gradient.

What is so striking in this change of topography is that both the former global and the former local have now taken the same starshaped aspect—in our projection grid of course, not ‘out there’. Context-building sites now look like the intersections of many trails of documents traveling back and forth, but local building sites, too, look like the multiple crossroads toward which templates and formats are circulating. If we take these two ‘networky’ shapes seriously, then the former landscape flattens itself for good since those two types of starlike shapes cannot be ordered on top of one another inside any threedimensional structure. They are now side-by-side, every move forcing the analyst to follow the edges without any jump or break, just like the two-dimensional space imagined by Edwin Abbott’s Flatland. Movements and displacements come first, places and shapes second. So in the end, localizing the global and re-dispatching the local are not as difficult as it appeared. After a few minutes of accommodation, the number of traces becomes so great that you would have to be blind not to follow them. Sites no longer differ in shape or size, but in the direction of the movements to and fro as well as in the nature, as we shall see, of what is being transported: information, traces, goods, plans, formats, templates, linkages, and so on. It is now the mythical sites of local and global that are hard to locate on a map. Where could those enchanted utopias have resided?

The reason why it’s so important to learn how to navigate into this flattened space is that, as soon as we become better at focusing on what circulates, we can detect many other entities whose displacements were barely visible before. Indeed, they were not supposed to circulate at all. It might be possible to pay attention to much subtler phenomena which earlier had to be stocked, because of their apparent subtlety, in the subject’s inner sanctuary. Just as a flat, dry, and dusty landscape reveals the trails left by all the animals that have passed through it, we might be able to detect moving entities that leave no trace whatsoever in the bushy undergrowth of the sociology of the social.[^268][^269]

Especially important is that which allows actors to interpret the setting in which they are located. No matter how many frames are pouring through localizers to format a setting, no matter how many documents are flowing from this setting to oligoptica and back, there is still a huge distance between the generic actors preformatted by those movements and the course of action carried out by fully involved individualized participants. Everyone has this common experience when they try and make sense of even the most carefully written user’s manual. No matter how many generic persons an assembly drawing has been designed for, you will surely start grumbling after hours on your newly purchased digital camera and feel that you are not one of these persons. By measuring the distance between instructions addressed to no one in particular and yourself, you have been made painfully aware of what Don Norman has called ‘the gap of execution’.[^270] It would be foolish to ignore that which gave the impression that face-to-face interactions were so ‘concrete’ and on such a ‘real life’ scale, and which gave the feeling that it was individuals who were carrying out the action.

Such a feeling, of course, was immediately lost when sociologists of the social substituted this healthy intuition with the hidden action of some invisible structure—at which point, nobody in particular was doing any action any more! It was also lost when interactionists retrieved a purposeful and personalized actor but without dissolving the frame ‘in which’ members were supposed to deploy their intelligence. A human agent is making sense of a world of objects which are by themselves devoid of any meaning. At which point we are back to square one, having to choose between meaning without object and objectivity without meaning. But the powerful insight would be lost just as fast if actors were simply localized by the agency of other sites through the medium of some material or intellectual techniques, without themselves being able to interpret and understand the propositions made by the setting.[^271] This is why we have to become sensitive to more elusive tracers than the ones we have reviewed so far.

Let us take the simple-minded example of the lecture hall that we used earlier. No matter how nicely it has been designed, it is still necessary for the teachers and the professors, in order for them to know what to do there, to do quite a lot of work. Without some equipment brought in, human actors would remain, even in the midst of the best-designed frame, unable to interpret what is given; they would remain as unconnected to the meaning of the site as a cat prowling on the Acropolis.

So we have to add something, but what and how? We know already what we don’t want to do if we are to pursue our ‘flattening’ of the landscape all the way: we don’t want to jump by resorting to another ‘level’ or another ‘type’ of resource. And yet, this would be the safest, the easiest, and the most reasonable strategy. However, as the reader is now painfully aware, reasonableness is not what I am after! I am conducting here a thought experiment that will pay off only if carried out all the way: How far can we maintain a point of view that abstains from ever using the local/global or the actor/system repertoire? Is it possible to resist the temptation? Once again, I am not trying to describe substantively or positively what the landscape is, but simply finding ways to resist the temptation to make a break in its description.

To fill in the ‘gap of execution’, the solution is usually to shift gears and to abruptly bring in ‘subjectivity’, ‘intentionality’, and ‘interiority’ or at least appeal to some sort of ‘mental equipment’. If the social framing from ‘outside’ is not enough to complete the course of action, then the remainder of the resources has to come from the ‘inside’ or from the human group locally assembled. At which point, positivism gives way to hermeneutics and sociologists pass the baton to psychologists or to cognitive scientists while structural sociologists shift to interpretative sociology. But if this jump in method is allowed to occur, the continuous trail I have tried to keep from the beginning would suddenly be interrupted; the flat map will be slashed yet again; the scene of an individual subjective actor having ‘some leeway’ ‘inside’ a larger system will be reactivated; the two mythical lands of global and local will be drawn anew; Merlin’s castle will pop up again.

So, in keeping with our myopic ANT obsession, we have to keep fumbling in the dark for another clamp.

Surely the question we need to ask then is where are the other vehicles that transport individuality, subjectivity, personhood, and interiority? If we have been able to show that glorified sites like global and local were made out of circulating entities, why not postulate that subjectivities, justifications, unconscious, and personalities would circulate as well?[^272] And sure enough, as soon as we raise this very odd but inescapable question, new types of clamps offer themselves to facilitate our enquiry. They could be called subjectifiers, personnalizers, or individualisers, but I prefer the more neutral term of plug-ins, borrowing this marvelous metaphor from our new life on the Web. When you reach some site in cyberspace, it often happens that you see nothing on the screen. But then a friendly warning suggests that you ‘might not have the right plug-ins’ and that you should ‘download’ a bit of software which, once installed on your system, will allow you to activate what you were unable to see before.[^273] What is so telling in this metaphor of the plug-in is that competence doesn’t come in bulk any longer but literally in bits and bytes. You don’t have to imagine a ‘wholesale’ human having intentionality, making rational calculations, feeling responsible for his sins, or agonizing over his mortal soul. Rather, you realize that to obtain ‘complete’ human actors, you have to compose them out of many successive layers, each of which is empirically distinct from the next. Being a fully competent actor now comes in discreet pellets or, to borrow from cyberspace, patches and applets, whose precise origin can be ‘Googled’ before they are downloaded and saved one by one.[^274]

As we have witnessed so many times throughout this book, information technologies allow us to trace the associations in a way that was impossible before. Not because they subvert the old concrete ‘humane’ society, turning us into formal cyborgs or ‘post human’ ghosts, but for exactly the opposite reason: they make visible what was before only present virtually. In earlier times, competence was a rather mysterious affair that remained hard to trace; for this reason, you had to order it, so to speak, in bulk. As soon as competence can be counted in bauds and bytes along modems and routers, as soon as it can be peeled back layer after layer, it opens itself to fieldwork.

Every pellet leaves a trace behind it that now has an origin, a label, a vehicle, a circuit, sometimes even a price tag.[^275] While information technology, standing as one human on a stage, was supposed to be an all-or-nothing affair, it has now clearly become the provisional result of a whole assemblage of plug-ins coming from completely different loci. To be a realistic whole is not an undisputed starting point but the provisional achievement of a composite assemblage.[^276]

Just as the division of labor created by the industries and bureaucracies helped Durkheim and Weber to trace their own definitions of social links, information technologies help us realize the work going on in actor-making. It’s now much easier to not consider the actor as a subject endowed with some primeval interiority, which turns its gaze toward an objective world made of brute things to which it should resist or out of which it should be able to cook up some symbolic brew. Rather, we should be able to observe empirically how an anonymous and generic body is made to be a person: the more intense the shower of offers of subjectivities, the more interiority you get.[^277] Subjects are no more autochthonous than face-to-face interactions. They, too, depend on a flood of entities allowing them to exist. To be an ‘actor’ is now at last a fully artificial and fully traceable gathering: what was before true only of the Leviathan is now also true for each of its ‘components’. Later on, this result will be important for our definition of politics.

Some plug-ins are fairly easy to trace. For instance, there are all of those official and legal papers which designate ‘you’ as being someone. If you doubt the ability of those humble paper techniques to generate quasi-subjects, try living in a large European city as an ‘undocumented alien’ or extricating yourself out of the FBI’s grip because of a misspelling of your name. Other vehicles leave such a thin trace as if they were really immaterial. But if we maintain our outlook, we can follow them as well: How many circulating cliche´s do we have to absorb before having the competence to utter an opinion about a film, a companion, a situation, a political stance? If you began to probe the origin of each of your idiosyncrasies, would you not be able to deploy, here again, the same star-like shape that would force you to visit many places, people, times, events that you had largely forgotten? This tone of voice, this unusual expression, this gesture of the hand, this gait, this posture, aren’t these traceable as well?[^278] And then there is the question of your inner feelings. Have they not been given to you? Doesn’t reading novels help you to know how to love? How would you know which group you pertain to without ceaselessly downloading some of the cultural cliche´s that all the others are bombarding you with?[^279] Without the avid reading of countless fashion magazines, would you know how to bake a cake? And what about putting on a condom, consoling your lover, brushing your hair, fighting for your rights, or picking out the right clothes? Magazines help here as well. If you take each of the rubrics as the mere ‘expression’ of some dark social force, then their efficacy disappears. But if you remember that there is nothing beyond and beneath, that there is no rear-world of the social, then is it not fair to say that they make up a part of your own cherished intimacy? We are now familiar with what should no longer appear as a paradox: it’s precisely once the overall society disappears that the full range of what circulates ‘outside’ can be brought to the foreground.

On the condition that we add another flow, another circuitry, through which plug-ins lend actors the supplementary tools—the supplementary souls—that are necessary to render a situation interpretable.[^280] A supermarket, for instance, has preformatted you to be a consumer, but only a generic one. To transform yourself into an active and understanding consumer, you also need to be equipped with an ability to calculate and to choose. In the sociology of the social there were only two sources for such a competence: either you were born with it as a human—as if Darwinian evolution had, from the dawn of time, prepared men and women to be supermarket calculators and optimal maximizers—or you were molded into becoming a clever consumer by the powerful grip of some economic infrastructure. But with this new topography that we are sketching, another source of competence might be located at your fingertips: there are plug-ins circulating to which you can subscribe, and that you can download on the spot to become locally and provisionally competent.

If you look at supermarkets in this way, a bewildering array of devices is underlined, each having the capacity to provide you with the possibility of carrying out calculations somewhat more competently. Even when one has to make the mundane decision about which kind of sliced ham to choose, you benefit from dozens of measurement instruments that equip you to become a consumer— from labels, trademarks, barcodes, weight and measurement chains, indexes, prices, consumer journals, conversations with fellow shoppers, advertisements, and so on.[^281] The crucial point is that you are sustaining this mental and cognitive competence as long as you subscribe to this equipment. You don’t carry it with you; it is not your own property. You might have internalized it somewhat, but even for that feat of internalization you need to download another plug-in! If you try to make a rational calculation away from such equipment—deciding for example to buy Universal Panoramas in order to become the World Company—you might have nothing more to make your ‘macro-decision’ with than rough estimates on the back of an envelope; you will no longer possess the competence to be rational at all.[^282]

Here again, it makes much more realistic sense to bypass entirely the two sites: the market forces and the individual agent.

Marcel Mauss defines ‘habitus’ and traces just the same social as Tarde:

A kind of revelation came to me in hospital. I was ill in New York. I wondered where previously I had seen girls walking as my nurses walked. I had the time to think about it. At last I realized that it was at the cinema. Returning to France, I noticed how common this gait was, especially in Paris; the girls were French and they, too, were walking in this way. In fact, American walking fashions had begun to arrive over here, thanks to the cinema. This was an idea I could generalize. The positions of the arms and hands while walking form a social idiosyncrasy, they are not simply a product of purely individual, almost completely psychical, arrangements and mechanisms. For example: I think I can also recognize a girl who has been raised in a convent. In general, she will walk with her fists closed. And I can still remember my third-form teacher shouting at me: ‘Idiot! Why do you walk around the whole time with your hands flapping wide open?’ Thus there exists an education in walking, too.

Another example: there are polite and impolite positions for the hands at rest. Thus you can be certain that if a child at the table keeps his elbows in when he is not eating, he is English. A young Frenchman has no idea how to sit up straight; his elbows stick out sideways; he puts them on the table, and so on.

Finally, in running, too, I have seen, you all have seen, the change in technique. Imagine, my gymnastics teacher, one of the top graduates of Joinville around 1860, taught me to run with my fists close to my chest: a movement completely contradictory to all running movements; I had to see the professional runners of 1890 before I realized the necessity of running in a different fashion.

Hence, I have had this notion of the social nature of the habitus for many years. Please note that I use the Latin word—it should be understood in France—habitus. The word translates infinitely better than habitude (habit or custom), the exis, the ‘acquired ability’ and ‘faculty’ of Aristotle (who was a psychologist). It does not designate those metaphysical habitudes, that mysterious ‘memory’, the subjects of volumes or short and famous theses. These ‘habits’ do not vary just with individuals and their imitations; they vary especially between societies, educations, proprieties and fashions, prestiges. In them we should see the techniques and work of collective and individual practical reason rather than, in the ordinary way, merely the soul and its repetitive faculties. (Mauss 1979: 100–1)

Cognitive abilities do not reside in ‘you’ but are distributed throughout the formatted setting, which is not only made of localizers but also of many competence-building propositions, of many small intellectual technologies.[^283] Although they come from the outside, they are not descended from some mysterious context: each of them has a history that can be traced empirically with more or less difficulty. Each patch comes with its own vehicle whose shape, cost, and circulation can be mapped out—as historians of accounting, cognitive anthropologists, and psychologists have so forcefully shown. If there is one thing that is not ‘in’ the agent, it is those many layers of competence builders that we have to ceaselessly download in order to gain some sort of ability for a while. This should be the advantage of a flattened landscape: when I utter such an assertion, it no longer means that I have to fall back on the other symmetric solution and say that ‘of course’ they are held by some ‘social context’. On the contrary, to say that they circulate through their own conduits means that they no longer come from either context or from the actor’s subjectivity, or for that matter from any clever compromise between the two.

But what about me, the ego? Am I not in the depth of my heart, in the circumvolutions of my brain, in the inner sanctum of my soul, in the vivacity of my spirit, an ‘individual’? Of course I am, but only as long as I have been individualized, spiritualized, interiorized. It is true that the circulation of these ‘subjectifiers’ is often more difficult to track. But if you search for them, you will find them all over the place: floods, rains, swarms of what could be called psycho-morphs because they literally lend you the shape of a psyche. Take for instance, love talks. If you doubt the efficacy of this kind of transportation, do the experiment. Try living without them for a bit and see how fast ‘you’—yes, the primeval ‘you’—will simply wither away.[^284] Even love, love especially, can be construed as that which comes from the outside, as a somewhat miraculous gift to create an inside. And it is certainly the way it has been traced in poems, songs and paintings, not to mention the countless retinue of angels, cherubs, putties, and arrows whose objective existence, yes objective, should also be taken into account. Even love has to have its vehicle, its specific techniques, its conduits, its equipment just as much as a trading room, a headquarters, or a factory. Of course, the medium will be different and so will be what is transported, but the general abstract shape will be the same—and it is this purely theoretical shape that I wish to capture for now.

What I am trying to do here is simply show how the boundaries between sociology and psychology may be reshuffled for good. For this, there is only one solution: make every single entity populating the former inside come from the outside not as a negative constraint From actors to attachments[^285][^286]

Have I not drifted from Charybdis to Scylla? What does it mean to say that psycho-morphs come from the outside? Have I fought so fiercely against the global/local dichotomy that I have ended up reinstating it in its oldest guise, namely the interior/exterior opposition, the stockin-trade dispute between psychology and sociology? What a huge step backward! Do I really want to revert to the time where actors were considered as so many puppets manipulated, in spite of themselves, by so many invisible threads?[^287] What’s the use of having done away with global structure and face-to-face interactions if it is to drown the person’s most intimate subjectivity in fields of anonymous forces? Acting without actors! Subjectivity without subjects! Back to the glorious Sixties! But what is gained? Well, that’s exactly where ANT’s gain may reside. After this flattening of the landscape, the outside itself has changed a lot: it’s no longer made of society—and nor is it made of nature. In doing away both with ungraspable subjectivity and with intractable structure, it might be possible to finally place at the forefront the flood of other more subtle conduits that allow us to become an individual and to gain some interiority.[^288]

The difficulty in following these types of ‘subject-carrying’ or psycho-morph mediators is that since they come from the ‘outside’, they seem to transport the same sort of constraints as the one imagined by sociologists of the social for their definition of society.[^289] And sure enough, given what they meant by ‘outside’, namely the constraining power of context or the causal determination of nature, there was not the slightest chance for plug-ins to deposit anything positive inside the actor. Structural forces had to do most of the work—give or take a few small marginal adjustments by the individuals. In their fanciful theory of action, this was the only way sociologists had imagined that the string of the puppeteer’s hand could activate the puppet.[^290] But we have no longer any reason to be intimidated by this odd way of conceiving the import of an outside force because we have detected two successive mistakes in the notion of the sociology of the social: one in the definition of the cause and the other in the vehicle that was supposed to transport the effect. The relationship between puppeteers and their puppets is much more interesting than that.[^291] Besides, we have also learned how to redress two misconceptions: we know that mediators are not causes and that without transformations or translations no vehicles can transport any effect. Something happens along the strings that allow the marionettes to move.

The hopeless division of labor between psychology and sociology may begin to change once the definition of the ‘outside’ has been dissolved and replaced by the circulation of plug-ins. While none of the the plug-ins have the power to determine, they can simply make someone do something. We are now in a position to bring the two points together and refurbish for good the notion of an outside: it’s not situated at the same place and the influence it exerts keeps acting through a totally different theory of action. The outside is not a context ‘made of’ social forces and it doesn’t ‘determine’ the inside.

The gravest consequence of the notion of context was that it forced us to stick to double-entry accounting so that whatever came from the outside was deducted from the total sum of action allotted to the agents ‘inside’. With that type of balance sheet, the more threads you added in order to make you act from the outside, the less you yourself acted: the conclusion of this accounting procedure was inescapable. And if you wished, for some moral or political reason, to save the actor’s intention, initiative, and creativity, the only way left was to increase the total sum of action coming from the inside by cutting some of the threads, thus denying the role of what is now seen as so many ‘bondages’, ‘external constraints’, ‘limits to freedom’, etc. Either you were a free subject or you lived in abject subjection. And of course critical sociologists reinforced this tendency since they couldn’t talk about the ‘outside force’ of the social, except by gloating over the ‘narrow constraints’ put by ‘the anonymous weight of society’ over ‘personal freedom’. But this odd landscape does not depress us any longer. The outside never resembles some Gobi desert invented by sociologists of context, nor is it simply populated by matters of fact; the inside never resembles an inner sanctum surrounded by cold social forces like a desert island circled by hungry sharks.[^292] Ins and outs, like ups and downs, are results not causes. The sociologist’s job is not to fix their limits in advance.[^293]

The difference between the two theories does not reside only in the number of bonds, but also in the theory of action that connects any one of those bonds. We saw earlier that what was wrong with the metaphor of marionettes was not their activation by the many strings firmly held in the hands of their puppeteers, but the implausible argument that domination was simply transported through them without translation. Of course marionettes are bound! But the consequence is certainly not that, to emancipate them, you have to cut all the strings. The only way to liberate the puppets is for the puppeteer to be a good puppeteer. Similarly for us, it is not the number of connections that we have to diminish in order to reach at last the sanctuary of the self. On the contrary, as William James so magnificently demonstrated, it is by multiplying the connections with the outside that there is some chance to grasp how the ‘inside’ is being furnished.[^294]

You need to subscribe to a lot of subjectifiers to become a subject and you need to download a lot of individualizers to become an individual—just as you need to hook up a lot of localizers to have a local place and a lot of oligoptica for a context to ‘dominate’ over some other sites.

It is only once the alternative between actor and system is ignored— note that I do not say overcome, reconciled, or solved—that the most important topic of sociology can begin to shine through. This had been Tarde’s major contribution against Spencer’s organism and Durkheim’s society. He clearly articulated the obligation for a social scientist to generate intra-psychology through the many mediations offered by inter-psychology, the former one being conceived as a sort of bridgehead for the later.[^295] We might end up gaining some ‘intrapsyche’ only if we are entering into a relationship with a lot of ‘extra-psyches’, or what could be called mind-churning substances, namely psycho-tropes or—to use still another expression about soul generating entities—psycho-genes.[^296] If you treat what comes from the outside as mediators offering an occasion to the next agent to behave as a mediator, the whole scene of the inside and outside might be modified for good. The puppeteer still holds many strings in her hands, but each of her fingers is itching to move in a way the marionette indicates. The more strings the marionettes are allowed to have, the more articulated they become.[^297]

We are now at least free from a whole set of discussions considering the ‘relative weight’ of ‘individual freedom’ over ‘structural determination’: every mediator along any chain of action is an individualized event because it is connected to many other individualized events. This might offer a good place to bid farewell to the notion of ‘actor’ that I have used all along as a provisional placeholder. What’s wrong with the word is not that it is often limited to humans—this limit we have learned to encroach upon—but that it always designates a source of initiative or a starting point, the extremity of a vector oriented toward some other end. Of course, when the sociology of the social held sway, it was important to insist on actors, activity, initiative, interpretation, improvisation, justification, interactions, and so on, because the only possible activity that context could bring was that of a cause in search of consequences, of a mediator looking for some passive intermediaries that would faithfully carry its forces. But this is no longer the case with ANT: the theory of action itself is different, since we are now interested in mediators making other mediators do things. ‘Making do’ is not the same thing as ‘causing’ or ‘doing’: there exists at the heart of it a duplication, a dislocation, a translation that modifies at once the whole argument. It was impossible before to connect an actor to what made it act, without being accused of ‘dominating’, ‘limiting’, or ‘enslaving’ it. This is no longer the case. The more attachments it has, the more it exists. And the more mediators there are the better.[^298]

Now it’s the actor, which so far in this book was kept as a point, an atom, or a source, that has to be flattened out and forced to take a starlike shape. What should we call this newly ‘flattened’ element? Is it something that is ‘made to act’? Is it something that is ‘triggered into being triggered into action’?[^299] Why not use actor-network? I know this expression remains odd because it could mean just the opposite as well, namely a solution to the actor/system quandary we have just rejected. But we have the word already at hand, and it’s not that badly designed in the end. So, an actor-network is what is made to act by a large star-shaped web of mediators flowing in and out of it. It is made to exist by its many ties: attachments are first, actors are second. To be sure, such an expression smacks of ‘sociologism’, but only as long as we put too much in ‘being’ and not enough in ‘having’. As Tarde insisted long ago, the family of ‘to have’ is much richer than the family of ‘to be’ because, with the latter, you know neither the boundary nor the direction: to possess is also being possessed; to be attached is to hold and to be held.[^300] Possession and all its synonyms are thus good words for a reworked meaning of what a ‘social puppet’ could be. The strings are still there, but they transport autonomy or enslavement depending on how they are held. From now on, when we speak of actor we should always add the large network of attachments making it act. As to emancipation, it does not mean ‘freed from bonds’ but well-attached.

In spite of the criticism I made earlier about the notion of society— by opposition to what I proposed to call the collective—an even more radical solution would be to consider these bundles of actor-networks in the same way that Whitehead considers the word ‘society’. For him societies are not assemblages of social ties—in the way Durkheim or Weber could have imagined them—but are all the bundles of composite entities that endure in time and space.[^301] In his words, a society needs new associations in order to persist in its existence. And of course, such a labor requires the recruitment, mobilization, enrollment, and translation of many others—possibly of the whole universe. What is so striking in this generalized definition of societies is that the respective meanings of subjectivity and objectivity are entirely reshuffled. Is a subject whatever is present? Is an object whatever was present? So every assemblage that pays the price of its existence in the hard currency of recruiting and extending is, or rather, has subjectivity. This is true of a body, of an institution, even of some historical event which he also refers to as an organism. Subjectivity is not a property of human souls but of the gathering itself—provided it lasts of course. If we could retain this vastly expanded meaning of society, then we could again understand what Tarde meant when he said that ‘everything is a society and that all things are society’.

---

[^255]: It’s rather astonishing to see even Garfinkel maintain this distinction between formal and informal: ‘According to the world wide social science movement and the corpus status of its bibliographies there is no order in the concreteness of things. The research enterprises of the social science movement are defeated by the apparently hopelessly circumstantial overwhelming details of everyday activities—the plenum, the plenty, the plenilunium (sic). To get a remedy, the social sciences have worked out policies and methods of formal analysis. These respecify the concrete details of ordinary activities as details of the analytical devices and of the methods that warrant the use of these devices.’ And he adds that ethnomethodology ‘consists of evidence to the contrary’. Garfinkel, Ethnomethodology’s Program, p. 95.

[^256]: A good example of the crucial importance of not taking the relative size of entities as a given is provided in the case of French water politics in Jean Pierre Le Bourhis (2004), ‘La publicisation des eaux. Rationalite´ et politique dans la gestion de l’eau en France (1964–2003)’.

[^257]: Such is one of the solutions devised by symbolic interactionists to give some maneuvering room to the individual intentional agent without modifying the overall framework of social theory.

[^258]: The word localizer in computer parlance might be slightly misleading since it is the manifestation of an even larger increase in standards which can then allow the local to be accepted as a mere variation of a more general pattern. We will tackle the question of standardization in the next chapter.

[^259]: Koolhas and Mau, Small, Medium, Large, Extra-Large.

[^260]: On the condition there exists well-kept archive. Archeologists have to toil much longer to reconstruct the connections.

[^261]: Shirley Strum (1982), ‘Agonistic Dominance among Baboons an Alternative View’ and see Insert p. 69.

[^262]: This is the dramatic episode narrated in Shirley Strum (1987), Almost Human: A Journey Into the World of Baboons.

[^263]: Since her earlier work, this has become somewhat of a standard for a host of other animals. See Richard Byrne and Andrew Whiten (1988), Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise and the Evolution of Intellects in Monkeys, Apes and Humans; Strum and Fedigan Primate Encounters; Vinciane Despret (1996), Naissance d’une the´orie e´thologique; and Vinciane Despret (2002), Quand le loup habitera avec l’agneau.

[^264]: For the difference between complicated and complex, see Strum and Latour, ‘The Meanings of Social: from Baboons to Humans’. For the definition of social tools, see Kummer, In Quest of the Sacred Baboon.

[^265]: This approach of technology as second nature is essential for Andre´ Leroi-Gourhan (1993), Gesture and Speech; Lewis Mumford (1967), The Myth of the Machine: Technics and Human Development; and Tom Hughes (2004), Human-Built World: How to Think about Technology and Culture.

[^266]: The implausibility of the individual would of course be much easier to detect for instance in India. See Louis Dumont (1982), Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and Its Implications. This entrenchment of the individual is most extreme in the rational choice mythology since it also includes a stabilized psychology and a stabilized cognition.

[^267]: I follow here a simple pedagogical example, but see Sequence 3 of Latour and Hermant, Paris the Invisible City. This is exactly the type of map that Cronon has been able to draw with his masterful study of Chicago in William Cronon (1991), Nature’s Metropolis. Chicago and the Great West and that Hutchins has been able to deploy with his study of ship navigation. See also what Law has been able to do with aircraft in Law, Aircraft Stories. Cognition is indeed so distributed that the idea of an individual doing a calculation is moot.

[^268]: See Michel Serres (1995), Conversations on Science, Culture and Time with Bruno Latour.

[^269]: This is why, especially for methodological reason, methodological individualism seems a very unfortunate choice of departure in spite of the attempt made in Raymond Boudon (1981), The logic of social action: an introduction to sociological analysis.

[^270]: See Norman, The Psychology of Everyday Things and Garfinkel, Ethnomethodology’s Program, Chapter 6.

[^271]: This is the shift introduced by Boltanski and The´venot in Bourdieu’s theory of field: actors are fully able to justify themselves and do not only hide their real motivations. See Luc Boltanski (1999), Distant Suffering: Morality, Media and Politics.

[^272]: Mol, The Body Multiple; Cussins, ‘Ontological Choreography’; and Myriam Winance (2001), The`se et prothe`se. Le processus d’habilitation comme fabrication de la personne: l’association franc¸aise contre les myopathies, face au handicap have shown in their own ways what equipment is needed to become a subject and how fragile it is.

[^273]: I often find that my reader would complain a lot less about my writings if they could download ANT version 6.5 instead of sticking with the beta.

[^274]: This multiplicity of plug-ins is clearly visible in The´venot’s list of regimes of action. See The´venot, ‘Which road to follow?’

[^275]: The massive digitalization of many types of documents may offer Tarde a belated vindication. The poor statistics available at the end of the 19th century could not validate his requirement for a point-to-point ‘epidemiology’. It’s interesting to think that the possibility of a Tardian quantitative sociology might be opened now. We now have quasiquantitative tools allowing us to follow in the same fashion rumors, opinions, facts, and fantasies. See Rogers, Information Politic on the Web. On the tracing of new quantum see Michel Callon (2001), ‘Les me´thodes d’analyse des grands nombres’.

[^276]: No one has made this point more emphatically than Donna Haraway (2000), How like a Leaf: an Interview with Thyrza Goodeve. But it’s probably with queer theory that the notion of multiple layers and artificial construction could be best applied. In spite of some posthuman ideology and masses of critical sociology, it offers a rich building site regarding the number of elements that can be detached and made to circulate. For a different approach see Stefan Hirschauer (1998), ‘Performing Sexes and Genders in Medical Practice’.

[^277]: A splendid allegory of this layered makeup is offered by computer-generated imagery. Siggraph meetings in Los Angeles, for example, have entire sessions devoted to it. There is a morning dedicated to the shine of nylon, one afternoon to the refraction of light onto red hair, one evening to the ‘realistic rendering’ of blows, and so on. As usual ‘virtual’ reality is a materialization of what is needed for ‘natural’ reality.

[^278]: See Jean Claude Schmitt (1990), La Raison des gestes dans l’Occident me´die´val; Jan Bremmer and Herman Roodenburg (1992), A Cultural History of Gesture: From Antiquity to the Present Day; and Genevie`ve Calbris (1990), The Semiotics of French Gesture.

[^279]: This is the main reason for the lasting impact of Lev Semenovich Vygotski (1978), Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Cognitive Processes.

[^280]: This is why Bourdieu’s notion of habitus, once it is freed from its social theory, remains such an excellent concept. So is the notion of equipment developed in The´venot, ‘Which road to follow?’

[^281]: See Cochoy, Une sociologie du packaging.

[^282]: As recent economic history shows, big decisions are less rational than small ones because they are much less equipped. No equipment, no rationality. There is a direct link in MacKenzie’s work between his earlier study of theorems and his present study of markets. See Donald MacKenzie (2001), Mechanizing Proof: Computing, Risk, and Trust and MacKenzie, An engine, not a camera. The same trend is visible in Karin Knorr’s moves from laboratory science, in Knorr-Cetina, Epistemic Cultures, to market ‘rationality’, in Knorr-Cetina and Bruegger, ‘Global Microstructures’.

[^283]: This propagation is key to the field of distributed cognition: ‘Internalization has long connoted some thing moving across some boundary. Both elements of this definition are misleading. What moves is not a thing, and the boundary across which movement takes place is a line that, if drawn too firmly, obscures our understanding of the nature of human cognition. Within this larger unit of analysis, what used to look like internalization now appears as a gradual propagation of organized functional properties across a set of malleable media.’ Hutchins, Cognition in the wild, p. 312 (my emphasis).

[^284]: There is a small but telling set of literature from the classic Denis De Rougemont (1983), Love in the Western World to Ulrich Beck and Elisabeth Beck-Gernsheim (1995), The Normal Chaos of Love and Sabine Chalvon-Demersay (1999), A Thousand Screenplays: The French Imagination in a Time of Crisis. But no one peeled back all the successive layers of all the equipment necessary better than Michel Foucault (1990), The History of Sexuality: An Introduction.

[^285]: Foucault’s later work is a good example of the richness of this line of thought, although the construction of human interior psyches is somewhat obfuscated by the earlier theme of the ‘death of the subject’. In spite of his own affirmation, the two are parallel, not contradictory.

[^286]: Durkheim showed how all logical and personal categories inside are in some ways the translation and interiorization of the outside. But this outside was mistaken for a society thus opening, in spite of Tarde’s warnings, the empty debate between psychoand socio-logy. Compare the sociology of logics in Gabriel Tarde (1893), La logique sociale with Emile Durkheim (1915), The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life.

[^287]: As this label indicates, post-structuralism is the survival of structuralism after the structure is gone, much like a chicken that goes on running after its head has been cut off. Although it has abandoned the search for coherence, post-structuralism has retained the same definition of causality: a few causes followed by long chains of passive placeholders or what I have called intermediaries.

[^288]: Peter Sloterdijk with his three-volume book on different types of spheres has offered a new and powerful metaphor to get out of the inside/outside dichotomy. Unfortunately, his work is not yet available in English. See Peter Sloterdijk (2004), Spha¨ren, 3 Bde.

[^289]: See Anne-Nelly Perret-Clermont (1979), La Construction de l’intelligence dans l’interaction sociale and her early critique of Piaget’s linkage between social theory and epistemology.

[^290]: And so does my version of the Roget’s Thesaurus! It proposes the following entries: ‘dupe’, ‘image’, ‘non-entity’, ‘slave’. No wonder the debate between psychology and sociology never goes anywhere.

[^291]: See p. 58 and Bruno Latour (1999a), ‘Factures/fractures. From the Concept of Network to the Concept of Attachment’.

[^292]: This move is complementary to what I did with the ‘outside’ of nature in Chapter 5 of Latour, Politics of Nature.

[^293]: On Durkheim’s misreading of Tarde’s psychology, see Louise Salmon (2004), La pense´e politique de Gabriel Tarde.

[^294]: The classic work on this ‘exteriorisation’ remains William James (1890), The Principles of Psychology.

[^295]: But unfortunately he did not have the allegory of information technologies to materialize his web of connections and instead had to rely on the loose metaphor of ‘imitative rays’. On Tarde’s limits see Bruno Karsenti (2002), ‘L’imitation. Retour sur le de´bat entre Durkheim et Tarde’.

[^296]: See Gomart, ‘Surprised by Methadone’ and Gomart ‘Methadone: Six Effects in Search of a Substance’.

[^297]: Witness the powerful effect on the audience of puppets held by visible manipulators in Japanese bunraku theater.

[^298]: Attachment is another word for what I tried to capture under the makeshift expression ‘factish’. See also Emilie Gomart and Antoine Hennion (1998), ‘A sociology of attachment: music amateurs, drug users’.

[^299]: See Franc¸ois Jullien (1995), The Propensity of Things: Toward a History of Efficacy in China.

[^300]: ‘So far, all of philosophy has been founded on the verb To be, whose definition seemed to have been the Rosetta’s stone to be discovered. One may say that, if only philosophy had been founded on the verb To have, many sterile discussions . . . would have been avoided. From this principle ‘‘I am’’, it is impossible to deduce any other existence than mine, in spite of all the subtleties of the world. But affirm first this postulate: ‘‘I have’’ as the basic fact, and then the had as well as the having are given at the same time as inseparable.’ Tarde, Monadologie et sociologie, p. 86.

[^301]: ‘The point of a ‘‘society’’, as the term is used here, is that it is self-sustaining; in other words, that it is its own reason.’ Alfred North Whitehead (1929/1978), Process and Reality. An Essay in Cosmology, p. 89. See Didier Debaise (2003), ‘Un empirisme spe´culatif: Construction, Processus et Relation chez Whitehead’.
