# Third Move: Connecting Sites

_Source pages: 230–257_

Is not the ‘Tortoise and the Hare’ fable rather like that of the ‘Ant and the Hare’ story? One character jumps, runs, leaps, slumbers, wakes up, and summersaults, so sure he is of winning the race and snatching the prize. But the other one never sleeps. He trudges along, masticating endlessly; he allows himself no break in digging around minuscule galleries, the walls of which are nothing but clay and saliva through which he travels back and forth. And yet is it not fair to say that the Ant, much to the hare’s great surprise, is going to win? By sticking obstinately to the notion of a flatland and by inserting clamps every time there is a temptation to take three-dimensional shapes for granted, we have been highlighting types of connections that had no recognizable existence before—even though everyone felt they had to be there. By refusing to leap to context or to stick to the local or to take any position in between, are we not registering now in our account a view of the social rarely seen before?

In the first chapter of Part II, we reckoned that the abrupt alternation between micro and macro, actor and system, was not due to some essential trait of sociology, but rather to the shadow projected over society by the body politic. For this reason, we then imagined two solutions to break the urge that was leading the observer from the local interaction to context or from structure to situated practice. The first move transferred the global, the contextual, and the structural inside tiny loci; it allowing us to identify through which two-way circulations those loci could gain some relevance for others. The second move transformed every site into the provisional endpoint of some other sites distributed in time and space; each site becomes the result of the action at a distance of some other agency. As I warned the reader several times, it’s only once the two corrective moves have been practiced assiduously that a third phenomenon appears, the only one worth the efforts of abstraction that we had to go through.

Now is the time for the Ant to fetch its prize. What happens when we practice the two gestures—localizing the global and distributing the local—together? Every time a connection has to be established, a new conduit has to be laid down and some new type of entity has to be transported through it. What circulates, so to speak, ‘inside’ the conduits are the very acts of giving something a dimension. Whenever a locus wishes to act on another locus, it has to go through some medium, transporting something all the way; to go on acting, it has to maintain some sort of more or less durable connection. Conversely, every locus is now the target of many such activities, the crossroads of many such tracks, the provisional repository of many such vehicles. Sites, now transformed into actor-networks for good, are moved to the background; connections, vehicles, and attachments are brought into the foreground. As soon as we do this, we end up with a superposition of various canals as entangled and varied as those that an anatomist would see if she could simultaneously color all the nerve, blood, lymph, and hormone pathways that keep organisms in existence. ‘Admirable networks’ (from retia mirabilia) is the expression histologists have used to register some of these wondrous shapes. How even more miraculous than the body does the social now appear! Could sociology, as Whitehead said of philosophy, not only begin but also end in wonder?

I hope it’s clear that this flattening does not mean that the world of the actors themselves has been flattened out. Quite the contrary, they have been given enough space to deploy their own contradictory gerunds: scaling, zooming, embedding, ‘panoraming’, individualizing, and so on. The metaphor of a flatland was simply a way for the ANT observers to clearly distinguish their job from the labor of those they follow around. If the analyst takes upon herself to decide in advance and a priori the scale in which all the actors are embedded, then most of the work they have to do to establish connections will simply vanish from view. It is only by making flatness the default position of the observer that the activity necessary to generate some difference in size can be detected and registered. If the geographical metaphor is by now somewhat overused, the metaphor of accounting could do just as well—even though I may have used it too much already. The transaction costs for moving, connecting, and assembling the social is now payable to the last cent, allowing us to resist the temptation that scaling, embedding, and zooming can be had for nothing without the spending of energy, without recruitment of some other entities, without the establishment of expensive connections.

Whatever metaphors we want to cling to, they do nothing more than help us counterbalance the weight of social inertia. They are part of our infra-language. Once again, everything happens as if ANT did not locate social theory at the same level as sociologists of the social. What the latter means by theory is a positive, substantive, and synthetic view of the ingredients out of which the social is fashioned—and those accounts may often be very suggestive and powerful. With ANT, we push theory one step further into abstraction: it is a negative, empty, relativistic grid that allows us not to synthesize the ingredients of the social in the actor’s place. Since it’s never substantive, it never possesses the power of the other types of accounts. But that’s just the point. Social explanations have of late become too cheap, too automatic; they have outlived their expiration dates—and critical explanations even more so. So many ingredients have been packed into society, individual, cognition, market, empire, structure, face-to-face interactions, that it has become as impossible to unpack them as it is to read the hundred thousand lines of code making up a proprietary operating system—not to mention trying to rewrite it. This is why we have to make sure that every entity has been reshuffled, redistributed, unraveled, and ‘de-socialized’ so that the task of gathering them again can be made in earnest. When we shift to ANT, we are like lazy car drivers newly converted to hiking; we have to relearn that if we want to reach the top of the mountain, we need to take it one step at a time, right foot after left foot, with no jumping or running allowed, all the way to the bitter end! I will show in the Conclusion why this point is so important not only for science but also for politics.

Three new questions may now be tackled in our discussion. The first is to detect the type of connectors that make possible the transportation of agencies over great distance and to understand why they are so efficient at formatting the social. The second is to ask what is the nature of the agencies thus transported and to give a more precise meaning to the notion of mediator that I have been using. Finally, if this argument about connections and connectors is right, it should be possible to come to grips with a logical consequence that readers must have already puzzled about: What lies in between these connections? What’s the extent of our ignorance concerning the social? In other words, how vast is the terra incognita we will have to leave blank on our maps? After having complained too often in this book that the social of sociologists was so badly packaged—we could not inspect its composition any more than we could check its degree of freshness—the time has now come to take much more positively the work done by the social sciences to render the social traceable.

From standards to collecting statements

Before proceeding forward, let’s do a little test to see whether we are able to tackle a topic where scale is obviously involved without ourselves making any assumption about the respective dimensions of all the agents along the chain. This will allow us to verify how nimble we have become in avoiding the local as well as the global.

Consider for instance this series of photos that show Alice voting in France for a general election. Go from the first to the last and try to decide which one is more local or more global than the other. The first, where Alice ponders the newspaper Le Monde to make up her mind about which party to vote for, cannot be said to be local simply because she is alone reading at her breakfast table. The same issue of this newspaper is read that day by millions. Alice is bombarded by a flood of cliche´s, arguments, columns, and opinions out of which she has to make up her own mind. But the last image that sums up the result of the election day cannot be said to be global either under the pretext that it’s the ‘whole of France’ that is summarized in one pie chart on television (with the surprising result that the Left has been winning). On the television inside Alice’s apartment, this pie chart is a few centimeters wide. So, once we realize that none of the successive images in this photomontage can be said to be smaller or bigger than any other, the key feature of their connectedness becomes fully visible— although it is not graspable on any single photograph![^302] Something is circulating here from the first to the last. In the opaque voting booth, Alice’s opinion is transformed into a piece of paper certified by her signature and then placed by scrutinizers into a ballot box, where it is then ticked off as one anonymous dot in a tally whose sum is wired to the Ministry of the Interior’s central bureau to be merged inside other double checked additions. What’s the relationship between the ‘small’ Alice and ‘France as a whole’? This path, laid down by this instrument, makes it physically possible to collect, through the circulation of paper technologies, a link between Alice and France whose exacting traceability has been slowly elaborated through two centuries of violent political history and contested voting reforms.[^303] The gap between ‘interaction’ and ‘context’ would hide the complex machinery establishing continuous connections between the sites, none of which is either big or small.[^305]

As soon as we concentrate on what circulates from site to site, the first type of entities to snap into focus are forms.[^304] Few words are more ambiguous, and yet this is just the sort of topic that the shift in social Such a displacement from ideal to material can be extended to information. To provide a piece of information is the action of putting something into a form.[^306] But now the word takes a very mundane, practical meaning; it can be a paper slip, a document, a report, an account, a map, whatever succeeds in practicing the incredible feat of transporting a site into another one without deformation through massive transformations.[^307] Watch in the case of Alice’s vote how many metamorphoses her opinion has undergone even though it has been faithfully registered—provided there has been no fraud along the way. It is to register such contradictory requirements of formalism that I had proposed long ago the expression of ‘immutable mobiles’.[^308] Once again, scientific activity offers many privileged cases of transportation through transformations: from the humble and smelly tasks of the taxidermy of rare animal specimens[^309] to the most elevated, but just as practical, writing of equations, through the building of a statistical apparatus or the even humbler task of paper clippings and file making of all hues and colors. Whatever the medium, a material description of formalism is now possible which takes very seriously the connecting ability of forms—conceived as physically as possible—while shedding the idea that formalisms could themselves be formally described.[^310]

The first important consequence of becoming attentive to the material traceability of immutable mobiles is to help us locate what has been so important with the sociology of the social from its inception. This will also be the occasion to make amends for the apparently cavalier way in which I have treated my elders and betters. I can now confess that it’s not without scruples that, throughout this book, I had to be so critical of the ways the social sciences approached the question of formatting. In truth, the sociology of the social has been amazingly successful. Its achievements are truly impressive and has made it possible for us all to ‘have’ a society to live in.[^311] I knew from the beginning that, although those sociologies make for awkward social theory because they interrupt the task of assembling the social, this is just the reason why they are so good at performing it, that is, at formatting the relations between sites. Their weakness is just what makes them so strong, or rather their strength at fixing up the social is what makes them so unwieldy when reassembling it. Thus, all things considered, critiques of sociology of the social are misdirected if they forget to consider their extraordinary efficacy in generating one form of attachments: the social ones, or at least that part of the social that has been stabilized. There cannot be anything wrong in forming, formatting, or informing the social world.[^312]

To reproach the social sciences for being formal would be like criticizing a dictionary for ranking words from A to Z or a pharmacist for having labels on all his vials and boxes. The task of stabilizing the five sources of uncertainty is just as important as that of keeping them open. Even though it’s a dangerous mistake to confuse the two, it would be ridiculous not to tackle the second under the pretext that the first has to be dealt with. On the contrary, once the task of deploying controversies about the social world is fully undertaken— as I did in Part I—then the crucial importance of the second task of enforcing boundaries, categories, and settlements has to be fully recognized as well.[^313] If it is such a grave methodological mistake to limit in advance and in the actor’s stead the range of entities that may populate the social world, it would be equally pathetic to ignore the constant work they do so as to restrict the repertoire of actants and to keep controversies at bay. Once again, even if it has become somewhat irritating, the only viable slogan is to ‘follow the actors themselves’; yes, one must follow them when they multiply entities and again when they rarefy entities.

We now must learn to pay respect to the formalizers, pigeonholers, categorizers, and number crunchers just as we had to learn earlier to reject them for interrupting too early the task of association and composition. I recognize that this new corrective calisthenics might make us sore, but who said the practice of social science should be painless? If the actors are busy doing many things at once, should we not become as pliable, articulate, and skillful as they are? If the social sciences per-form the social, then those forms have to be followed with just as much care as the controversies. This is especially the case now that we no longer run the risk of confusing such a study of formalism with its formalist description. Forms have not ‘lost’ anything. They have not ‘forgotten’ any sort of human, concrete, lived-in dimension. They are neither ‘cold’ nor ‘heartless’, nor are they devoid of a ‘human face’. Following the making, the fine-tuning, the dissemination, and upkeep of immutable mobiles will not for one second take us away from the narrow galleries of practice.[^314] If there is one opposition that no longer holds us back, it’s the one that was supposed to pit positivist against interpretative sociologies. Once carefully relocated, their intuitions reveal two successive aspects of social assemblages.[^315]

In following the stabilization of controversies, we are greatly helped if we bring to the foreground the crucial notion of standards. We can say that the sociology of the social circulates in the same way as physical standards do or, better yet, that social sciences are part of metrology. Before science studies and especially ANT, standardization and metrology were sort of dusty, overlooked, specialized, narrow little fields. This is no wonder since their truly wonderful achievements were cut off by the gap between local and global that we have now recognized to be an artifact. As soon as local and global disappears, the central importance of standards and the immense advantages we draw from metrology—in the widest acceptance of the term—become obvious.

Take, for instance, the case of the platinum kilogram maintained by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (Bureau International des Poids et Mesures) in a deep vault inside the Breteuil Pavillon at the Se`vres park outside of Paris. Is it a convention? Yes. Is it a material object? Yes. Is it an international institution? Once more, yes. Does it represent the head of a metrological chain, the ideal model to which all other inferior copies are compared in a solemn ceremony once every two years? Again, yes. There is no doubt that it is a hybrid. And yet it is exactly those confusing entities that allow all the metrological networks of the world to have some sort of ‘common weight’. Is a metrological reference like the kilogram local or global? Local, since it always resides somewhere and circulates inside special boxes using specific signals, at certain specified times, following specific protocols.[^316] Is it global? Sure, since without standards like the watt, the newton, the ohm, the ampere, that is, without the Syste`me International d’Unite´s, there would be no global of any sort because no locus would have the ‘same’ time, the ‘same’ distance, the ‘same’ weight, the same intensity of electric current, the same chemical ‘reagents’, the ‘same’ biological reference materials, etc. There would be no baseline, no benchmark. All sites would be incommensurable for good.

Standards and metrology solve practically the question of relativity that seems to intimidate so many people: Can we obtain some sort of universal agreement?[^317] Of course we can! Provided you find a way to hook up your local instrument to one of the many metrological chains whose material network can be fully described, and whose cost can be fully determined. Provided there is also no interruption, no break, no gap, and no uncertainty along any point of the transmission. Indeed, traceability is precisely what the whole of metrology is about! No discontinuity allowed, which is just what ANT needs for tracing social topography. Ours is the social theory that has taken metrology as the paramount example of what it is to expand locally everywhere, all the while bypassing the local as well as the universal. The practical conditions for the expansion of universality have been opened to empirical inquiries. It’s not by accident that so much work has been done by historians of science into the situated and material extension of universals. Given how much modernizers have invested into universality, this is no small feat.

As soon as you take the example of scientific metrology and standardization as your benchmark to follow the circulation of universals, you can do the same operation for other less traceable, less materialized circulations: most coordination among agents is achieved through the dissemination of quasi-standards. For many types of traces the metaphor is pretty easy to follow: What would be the state of any economical activity without accounting codes and summaries of best practices? If, for instance, you shift from the North American to the European Union accounting format, you offer investors different handrails to help them make calculations: profitable European companies will fall in the red, while others will jump into black.[^318]

Of course, those who believe the economy to be an infrastructure would not be moved by this ‘little difference’ in accounting; they will say that it is moot compared to the ‘real impact’ of economical forces down below. But those of us who have to understand what it means to calculate something, to externalize some elements and to internalize others to take them, literally, into the account, are going to follow nonetheless every little detail of this ‘technical dispute’ because explaining what is a profit, an exploitation, or a plus value depends entirely upon such niceties.[^319] If economies are the outcome of economics, as Michel Callon has argued, the humble paper tools allowing coordination are at once placed in the foreground.

Other circulations of standards seem more tenuous, even though their tractability is fairly good as long as the observer does not let the irruption of the ‘social explanation’ break this Ariadne thread. How would you know your ‘social category’ without the enormous work done by statistical institutions that work to calibrate, if not to standardize, income categories? How would one identify oneself as ‘uppermiddle class’, ‘yuppy’, or ‘preppy’ without reading the newspapers? How would you know your ‘psychological profile’ without more statistical surveys, more professional meetings, more consensus conferences? How would a psychiatrist categorize a mental patient without the DSM?[^320] It is no use saying that those categories are arbitrary, conventional, fuzzy, or, on the contrary, too sharply bounded or too unrealistic. They do solve practically the problem of extending some standard everywhere locally through the circulation of some traceable document—even though the metaphor of a document might dim somewhat. It is not the case that some powerful people unfairly ‘pigeon-hole’ other people whose ‘ineffable interiority’ is thus ignored and mutilated; rather, the circulation of quasi-standards allow anonymous and isolated agencies to slowly become, layer after layer, comparable and commensurable— which is surely a large part of what we mean by being human. This common measurement depends, of course, on the quality of what is transferred. The question is not to fight against categories but rather to ask: ‘Is the category subjecting or subjectifying you?’ As we saw at the end of the last chapter, freedom is getting out of a bad bondage, not an absence of bonds.

Viewed in this way, we can now understand the great services, albeit unwittingly, that the sociology of the social can render to our inquiry. It has rendered traceable that portion of the social that is going to be stocked and stabilized just as much as utility companies, information technology, bureaucracies and, more generally, the dissemination of formats and benchmarks have been rendering the cost of generating universality visible. This is why the social sciences are as much a part of the problem as they are a solution: they ceaselessly kept churning out the collective brew. Standards that define for everyone’s benefit what the social itself is made of might be tenuous, but they are powerful all the same. Theories of what a society is or should become have played an enormous role in helping actors to define where they stand, who they are, whom they should take into account, how they should justify themselves, and to which sort of forces they are allowed to bend. If natural sciences, like physics or chemistry, have transformed the world, how much more have the social sciences transformed what it is for humans to be connected to one another? Actors can download those theories of the social as effectively as they do MP3 files. And of course the very idea that ‘we are members of a society’, that we are ‘accountable’, that we have ‘legal responsibility’, that ‘gender is different from sex’, that ‘we have a responsibility toward the next generation’, that we have ‘lost social capital’, etc., does circulate through conduits that intellectual historians can reconstruct almost as precisely as their colleagues do for the International clock, the ohm, the meter, double-entry bookkeeping, or the spread of ISO-9000 standards. Social theories are not behind all this but are very much in the foreground. Each one is trying to expand or is, as Tarde noted, ‘dreaming like Alexander of conquering the world’. Even if one social theory had reached hegemony, it would never be more universal than the meter, and like it, it would not survive a minute longer than the metrological chains that sustain it.[^321]

As soon as we become good at tracing it, we can use this topography to tackle other conduits that are not materialized continuously by some state apparatus but whose movements have nonetheless the same effect. Collecting statements play exactly the same role, on condition that we don’t see them as simply ‘representing’ or ‘distorting’ existing social forces. For example, the medieval expression Vox populi, vox Dei does not simply ‘express’ some widely held popular belief residing in the eternal wisdom of the people. As Alain Boureau has done, you can document most of the occurrences of this speech act during the Middle Ages, draw the networky shape of its usage and show that every time it has been uttered, it has modified, albeit slightly, the distribution of roles and powers among deus, populus, vox, and rex.[^322] We have learned from the first source of uncertainty that even a tiny change in the ways of talking about groups would change the performation of those groups. This is even truer when a statement carries a different social theory as is the case with this highly unstable expression which implies, like a delicate relief carved on the surface of a gem, a whole interpretation of the linkages between theology and politics.

These collecting statements are not rare and exotic cases. Think of what is achieved when an American proudly exclaims ‘This is a free country!’ or when a Frenchman retorts ‘On est en Re´publique quand meˆme!’ Consider how many positions are modified when the ‘principle of precaution’ is invoked by European bureaucrats against the more classical American definition of risk.[^323] Fathom what is triggered in a Middle Eastern audience when you speak of an ‘Axis of Evil’ or plead for ‘an Islamic Enlightenment’. Collecting statements not only traces new connections but also offers new highly elaborated theories of what it is to connect.[^324] They perform the social in all practical ways. Such is the power of the ‘justifications’ analyzed by Boltanski and The´venot: they have no size but they leave ‘sizings’, so to speak, in their wake since those expressions allow people to rank themselves as well as the objects in dispute. Every time an expression is used to justify one’s action, they not only format the social but also provide a second order description of how the social worlds should be formatted.325 It’s precisely because scale is not a fixed feature of the social that those collecting statements play such an important role. As soon as they are allowed to simply represent, reify, or objectify something else, for instance the social context behind them, they efficacy stops being visible. But as soon as they are taken again as so many standards circulating along tiny metrological chains, they clearly become the source of what we mean by being in a society. Without collecting statements, how could the collective be collected?

Mediators at last

Now that we understand how to navigate our way through the flattened landscape and how to pay our respects to the formatting power of the sociology of the social, the next step is as difficult as it is logical. The very metrological power of the social sciences is just what makes it difficult for them to encounter the social as associations. It’s precisely because it is so good at calibrating and benchmarking stabilized definitions of the social that it finds so impractical the sizing up of newcomers that are constantly imported in the course of controversies. The better you are at defining the ‘older’ social, the worse you are at defining the ‘new’ one. The situation is exactly the same with the technical fields of metrology: they allow all the other laboratories to do science, but they are not themselves the sources of much discovery—even though they are quick to use any new fact to improve the accuracy of their instruments by a few more decimal places.[^326] Metrology is no more the whole of science than the sociology of the social is the whole of sociology. The social that makes up society is only one part of the associations that make up the collective. If we want to reassemble the social, it’s necessary, aside from the circulation and formatting of traditionally conceived social ties, to detect other circulating entities.

This detection is made easier once we know that we should not confuse the already assembled social with the work of reassembling it, and once we learn how not to substitute the entities we are looking for with something made out of social stuff. By localizing the circulation, production, formatting, and metrology of the social inside tiny, expansive, and expensive conduits, we have already opened a space in which other types of entities may begin to circulate.

But if we wish to profit from this small ‘window of opportunity’, we have to modify the default setting of our inquiries. We should not state that ‘when faced with an object, ignore its content and look for the social aspects surrounding it’. Rather, one should say that ‘when faced with an object, attend first to the associations out of which it’s made and only later look at how it has renewed the repertoire of social ties’. In other words, what we have to understand is why sociologists are so shy to meet the non-social entities that make up the social world, even though this wondrous encounter is a most common experience. It’s as if we could not stand meeting face-to-face the puzzling phenomena that keep proliferating whenever we feel that collective life is breaking down. Why is it that when faced with religion, we tend to limit our inquiry to its ‘social dimensions’ and take as a scientific virtue not to study religion itself? When faced with science, why is our first reaction to politely stick to its ‘social biases’ and not to account for objectivity itself? Why is it that when inquiring about art we restrict ourselves only to ‘what is social’ in the appreciation of a masterpiece and not to the many other sources from which its worth could come from? When we study economics, why are we so hesitant at going to the heart of our attachments to goods and instead limit ourselves to ‘the something sociological’ that seems to ‘embed’ the purely rational calculations? And so on. It’s as if our first reaction was to welcome associations only if they had first been covered in a coat made of social ties; as if we could never accept to talk with the original characters but only with the social forces that act as their proxies. In a period not known for its chastity, such prudishness is rather extraordinary: ‘Hide, please hide, I can’t bear to see those associations!’ or ‘Before entering the palace of social sciences please conceal yourself under the chador of social explanations.’

Although our most common encounter with society is to be overloaded by new elements that are not themselves part of the social repertoire, why do we keep insisting that we should stick to the short list of its accepted members? Such a limitation made sense during the time of modernization. To mark a clean break with the past, it was logical to limit in advance society to a small number of personae gratae. But this doesn’t mean that sociology should accept forever to be an object-less discipline, that is, a science without object. Respecting the formatting power of the sociology of the social is one thing, but it’s another to restrict oneself to metrology and abandon the discovery of new phenomena. How could we call empirical a discipline that excises out of the data only those that can be packaged into ‘social explanations’? It does not take much courage or imagination to see that, once modernism is put aside, such an attitude no longer makes moral, scientific, or political sense.

Consider for instance what would happen if we were approaching the study of religion while keeping the older default settings. Pious souls have an uncanny obstinacy to speak as if they were attached to spirits, divinities, voices, ghosts, and so on. All of those entities would have, of course, no existence at all in the observer’s agenda since they would not pertain to the limited repertoire of agencies fixed at the onset. So what should we do with what the actors designate ceaselessly as ‘real beings’? We would have to put scare quotes around them, bracket their existence out, and locate them firmly in the believer’s mind. We would literally have to invent a believer.[^327] A first fanciful sphere would begin to develop. Now since those entities don’t exist but are nonetheless ‘taken as’ being real, they have to come from the inside of one’s spirit or brain.

But divinities, spirits, and voices live a rather cramped life inside the individual person’s sphere. They are too precise, too technical, too innovative. They move too wildly and they obviously overflow the individual capacity of invention, imagination, and self-delusion. And besides, actors still insist they are made to do things by those real entities ‘outside’ of them! Ordinary persons don’t want them to be just an object of belief and so those entities have to come from the outside after all. Does this mean that we have to accept their real existence? No, no, since they don’t exist—that’s supposedly the only ‘sure fact’ of the matter. What is the only reality which is outside the individual and which has the strength to sustain the existence of non-existing phenomena? The answer of course is society, the social made of social stuff. Here, a second even bigger sphere would begin to develop out of our own studies: the non-existing social stuff in charge of maintaining the existence of non-existing entities that populate the narrow mind of deluded members. And all of that would be in the name of good science and serious scholarship! All the while, ordinary folks would keep insisting that they are made to act by real entities outside of themselves.

But any science has to invent risky and artificial devices to make the observer sensitive to new types of connections. Is it not obvious that it makes no empirical sense to refuse to meet the agencies that make people do things? Why not take seriously what members are obstinately saying? Why not follow the direction indicated by their finger when they designate what ‘makes them act’? A (surely fake) Chinese proverb says that ‘When the wise man shows the moon, the moron looks at the finger’. I find it impossible to accept that social sciences could be so debased as to create entire disciplines to make scholars moronic. Why not say that in religion what counts are the beings that make people act, just as every believer has always insisted?[^328] That would be more empirical, perhaps more scientific, more respectful, and much more economical than the invention of two impossible non-existing sites: one where the mind of the believer and the social reality are hidden behind illusions propped up by even more illusions. Besides, what is so scientific in the notion of ‘belief’?

If such a default setting is accepted—look at the object first and only later at the standardized social—there is of course a catch. I am not deluded enough to believe that ANT could escape the fate of all theories: to think is not to solve arduous problems, only to displace them. For such an encounter with objects to take place, other circulating entities have to be granted back some rights of citizenry, so that they, too, can have a seat with the older members. But aren’t sociologists of the social proud of having dissolved all those exotic objects? Do we really have to bring back the gods when talking of religion, masterpieces when analyzing art, and objective facts when studying science? Is this not exactly the obstacle that social science is proud of having left behind? By invoking the existence of non-social circulating entities, is this not taking the most reactionary, backward, and archaic move possible? This is where the Ant wins or loses. Can we anticipate a social science that takes seriously the beings that make people act? Can sociology become empirical in the sense of respecting the strange nature of what is ‘given into experience’, as zoologists do with their zoos and botanists with their herbariums? Can we trace social connections shifting from one non-social being to the next, instead of replacing all entities populating the world by some ersatz made ‘of’ social stuff? Even simpler: can social science have a real object to study?

Before answering emphatically ‘no’, consider for a minute what it would do to the sensitivity of our instruments were we to change the default setting and consider objects first, rather than beat around the bush in search of social explanations. Then, compare it with the ways in which religion was mishandled in the example just mentioned. Take works of art, for instance.[^329] Apart from religion, no other domain has been more bulldozed to death by critical sociology than the sociology of art. Every sculpture, painting, haute cuisine dish, techno rave, and novel has been explained to nothingness by the social factors ‘hidden behind’ them. Through some inversion of Plato’s allegory of the Cave, all the objects people have learned to cherish have been replaced by puppets projecting social shadows which are supposed to be the only ‘true reality’ that is ‘behind’ the appreciation of the work of art. Nowhere has social explanation played more the role of a negative King Midas transforming gold, silver, and diamonds into dust. And yer, as one sees in religion, if you are listening to what people are saying, they will explain at length how and why they are deeply attached, moved, affected by the works of art which ‘make them’ feel things. Impossible! Forbidden! To be affected is supposed to be mere affectation.[^330] So what should we do if we keep the old setting? Well, here again, as for religion, science, and politics, people are made to delude themselves by the ‘scientific’ grasp of social science: they are transmogrified, once more, into believers! And here again, as always, some people, infuriated by the barbarous irreverence of ‘social explanations’, come forth and defend the ‘inner sanctity’ of the work of art against barbarians. And sadly—the slope is steep, the outcome inevitable—we end up swinging gently between ‘internalism’ and ‘externalism’, esthetic and social explanations, all the way back to kindergarten.

Of course, this is not what is empirically given because the beings to which we are attached via the mediation on the works of art, if they never resemble the social of sociologists, never look like the insulated ‘object’ of esthetics with its ‘inner core’ of ‘ineffable beauty’. While in the old paradigm you had to have a zero-sum game—everything lost by the work of art was gained by the social, everything lost by the social had to be gained by the ‘inner quality’ of the work of art—in the new paradigm you are allowed a win/win situation: the more attachments the better.[^331] Is this not the most common experience? You watch a painting; a friend of yours points out a feature you had not noticed; you are thus made to see something. Who is seeing it? You, of course. And yet, wouldn’t you freely acknowledge that you would have not seen it without your friend. So who has seen the delicate feature? Is it you or your friend? The question is absurd. Who would be silly enough to deduct from the total sum of action the influence of pointing something out? The more influence, the better. And if you are allowed progressively to influence the quality of the varnish, the procedures of the art market, the puzzles of the narrative programs, the successive tastes of collectors making up a long retinue of mediators, then the ‘inner’ quality of the work will not diminish but, on the contrary, be reinforced.[^332] The more ‘affluence’, the better.[^333] It is counterintuitive to try and distinguish ‘what comes from viewers’ and ‘what comes from the object’ when the obvious response is to ‘go with the flow’. Object and subject might exist, but everything interesting happens upstream and downstream. Just follow the flow. Yes, follow the actors themselves or rather that which makes them act, namely the circulating entities.

In the pre-relativist definition of the social, what had been brought to the foreground was the human participant and then, through a sharp discontinuity, the social world of beyond. Nothing was allowed to encounter humans unless it was made of social ties. Such was the etiquette of this odd diplomacy. In the new definition it’s just the opposite: human members and social context have been put into the background; what gets highlighted now are all the mediators whose proliferation generates, among many other entities, what could be called quasi-objects and quasi-subjects. To take up and reverse the rather unfortunate astronomical simile rendered even shakier by Kant’s use of it, instead of objects turning around social aggregates as in the pre-Copernican sociology, various social aggregates are emanating out of the many attachments which now occupy the center of the social universe. No matter how hesitant the metaphor, it is such a shift in perspective that ANT is looking for. Things, quasi-objects, and attachments are the real center of the social world, not the agent, person, member, or participant—nor is it society or its avatars. Is this not a better way, to use another of Kant’s expressions, of rendering sociology able at last to ‘walk onto the sure path of science’?

The reader might remember that in the very first pages of this book, when I had to define as sharply as possible the difference between sociology of the social and sociology of associations, I had to say, following Tarde, that the first had simply confused the explanans with the explanandum: society is the consequence of associations and not their cause. At the time, this trenchant distinction could not be very convincing because it simply reversed the direction of causal efficacy. I might now be in a position to offer a more precise definition: there are many other ways to retrace the entire social world than the narrow definition provided by standardized social ties.

I could of course maintain the simplified argument and claim, for instance, that it’s not science that is explained by social factors, but scientific content that explains the shape of its context; that it’s not social power that explains law, but legal practice that defines what it is to be bound; that it’s not technology that is ‘socially shaped’, but rather techniques that grant extension and durability to social ties; that it’s not social relations that ‘embed’ economical calculations, but economists’ calculations that provide actors with the competence to behave in an economic way, and so on. Although every one of these inversions would be right in terms of ANT, they would remain partial because I have kept the two positions of what explains and what should be explained intact, simply substituting one for the other. In this first formulation it’s not the social that accounts for associations but rather associations that explain the social.

But now that we are getting used to traveling in the new flatland, the two positions themselves have vanished together with the very urge for a social explanation that would appeal to the stock of already stabilized social ties: social is not a place, a thing, a domain, or a kind of stuff but a provisional movement of new associations. This change of topography allows for the same ANT argument to be now presented in a more interesting light, offering, so to speak, landing strips for other entities to enter the collective, entities just as complete, ubiquitous, respectable, and empirical as the social of sociologists but not as thoroughly followed by them.

It’s not only that law, for instance, is unexplainable by the influence social forces exert over it; and it’s not even true to say that law has to explain in turn what society is, since there is no society to be explained. Law has much better things to do: one of them is to circulate throughout the landscape to associate entities in a legal way. Science cannot of course be explained by its social context, but nor does it really have to be used in order to explain the ingredients of social relations. It, too, has much better things to do: one of them is to circulate throughout, tying entities together in a scientific way. Although it would be pretty empty to explain religion as a fanciful embodiment of society, doing the reverse would be only slightly better because religion does not even aim at explaining the shape of society either. It, too, has much more potent things to do, namely gathering all the same entities as law and science did but tying them together in a religious way. Since explaining politics by power and domination is a moot point, there would be no sense either in simply reversing the argument, since politics has a much more important task to fulfill, namely to trace again and again the paradoxical shape of the body politic in a political way. And the same could be said of many other types of connectors which are now center stage because it is their displacements that trace social connections—an expression that, as we know, does not mean ‘connections made of social’, but new associations between non-social elements.

Now comes the tricky part as here comes the straw that breaks the camel’s back: displacement yes, but of what? What does it mean to speak of legal, religious, scientific, technical, economical, and political ‘ways’ of associating? And how could this be comparable with the traces left by the calibrated definitions of social ties? This is where the simile of the Copernican revolution is but a meek understatement; this is where the real rupture is going to occur with any sort of ‘social’ science if we don’t modify for good the meaning of this adjective—and this is where the few readers I have managed to keep until now may well abandon the theory for good.[^334] To understand what I take to be the ultimate goal of ANT, we have to let out of their cages entities which had been strictly forbidden to enter the scene until now and I might have used the relativity metaphor too often but the parallel is striking: abandoning social explanation is like abandoning the ether; nothing is lost except an artifact that made impossible the development of a science by forcing observers to invent entities with contradictory features, blinding them to the real ones. What I see as the major advantage of the odd move I propose is that it allows social scientists to get an empirical grasp on what all members actually do. Once social explanations are relocated into the making and dissemination of standards, the other beings that gather the collective in their own ways may be emphasized at last. No pious soul ever accepted to be merely a believer, so why act as if belief was the only way to ‘explain’ religion? No amateur ever alternated between ‘subjectivity’ and ‘objectivity’, so why force the whole sociology of art into this artificial quandary? No engineer ever distinguished the assembly of people and the assemblage of parts, so why explain things as if society and technology had to be kept separate? No laboratory scientist was ever confronted with an object ‘out there’ independently of the work to ‘make it visible’, so why act as if the alternative between ‘realism’ and ‘constructivism’ was interesting? No politician was ever confronted with mere domination, so why pretend that the distinction between formal procedures and real social forces was important? If the word ‘empirical’ means ‘faithful to experience’, then is this not a way to respect what is given in the most common encounters with the social?[^335][^336]

Mediators have finally told us their real names: ‘We are beings out there that gather and assemble the collective just as extensively as what you have called so far the social, limiting yourselves to only one standardized version of the assemblages; if you want to follow the actors themselves, you have to follow us as well.’ When you begin addressing mediators that scrupulously, you realize that very few of them are content with the ontological repertoire granted by the two former collectors of society and nature. Law, science, religion, economies, psyches, moralities, politics, and organizations might all have their own modes of existence, their own circulations. The plurality of inhabited worlds might be a farfetched hypothesis but the plurality of regimes of existence in our own world, well that’s a datum.[^337] Is there any reason why sociology should keep ignoring it?[^338]

The problem is that the social sciences have never dared to really be empirical because they believed that they simultaneously had to engage in the task of modernization. Every time some enquiry began in earnest, it was interrupted midway by the urge to gain some sort of relevance. This is why it’s so important to keep separate what I earlier called the three different tasks of the social sciences: the deployment of controversies, the stabilization of those controversies, and the search for political leverage. But before we take up this last question of political epistemology, I have to point out another puzzling feature that is the reason for writing this introduction. Contrary to all the other ‘clamps’ I managed to put in place, this one will break the continuity of the networks, the terra firma of traces and documents. This one will lead us back to the sea, the sea of our common ignorance.

Plasma: the missing masses

What a great relief it is to discover that we are not ‘in’ society—no more than we are ‘in’ nature. The social is not like a vast impalpable horizon in which every one of our gestures is embedded; society is not omnipresent, omniscient, ubiquitous, watching every one of our moves, sounding every one of our most secret thoughts like the omnipotent God of older catechisms. When we accept to draw the flattened landscape for which I offered a list of props, tricks, grids, and clamps, the social—at least that part that is calibrated, stabilized, and standardized—is made to circulate inside tiny conduits that can expand only through more instruments, spending, and channels. The total, that is the systematic or structural, is not ignored but rather carefully situated inside one of the many Omnimax theaters offering complete panoramas of society—and we now know that the more thrilling the impression, the more enclosed the room has to be. Society is not the whole ‘in which’ everything is embedded, but what travels ‘through’ everything, calibrating connections and offering every entity it reaches some possibility of commensurability. We should now learn to ‘hook up’ social channels like we do cable for our televisions. Society does not cover the whole any more than the World Wide Web is really worldwide.

But then the next question is so simple, the step forward so inevitable, the consequence so logical to draw that I am sure every reader has already anticipated this last aspect. If it is true, as ANT claims, that the social landscape possesses such a flat ‘networky’ topography and that the ingredients making up society travel inside tiny conduits, what is in between the meshes of such a circuitry? This is why, no matter its many defects, the net metaphor remains so powerful. Contrary to substance, surface, domain, and spheres that fill every centimeter of what they bind and delineate, nets, networks, and ‘worknets’ leave everything they don’t connect simply unconnected. Is not a net made up, first and foremost, of empty spaces? As soon as something as big and encompassing as the ‘social context’ is made to travel throughout the landscape much like a subway or gas pipes, the inescapable question is: What sort of stuff is it that does not get touched by or is not hooked up on those narrow sort of circulations? Once this question is raised, it’s as if a vertiginous reversal of background and foreground had taken place. Once the whole social world is relocated inside its metrological chains, an immense new landscape jumps into view. If knowledge of the social is limited to the termite galleries in which we have been traveling, what do we know about what is outside? Not much.

In a way, this is the consequence of taking formalism materially. If formalism doesn’t offer a complete description of itself, this means that in order to complete any act of formalism you need to add something that is coming from elsewhere and which, by definition, is not itself formal. This is Wittgenstein’s greatest lesson: what it takes to follow rules is not itself describable by rules. As usual, it’s Garfinkel who offers the starkest definition of the ‘outside’ to which we should appeal in order to complete any course of action: ‘The domain of things that escape from FA [Formal analytic] accountability is astronomically massive in size and range.’[^339] Even though he did not realize the true importance of standardization, Garfinkel’s metaphor is not an exaggeration: the ratio of what we have formatted to what we ignore is indeed astronomical. The social as normally construed is but a few specks compared to the number of associations needed to carry out even the smallest gesture.

You find this same bewilderment in many different schools of social theory: action doesn’t add up. For instance, it’s the great virtue, not to say the charm, of Howie Becker’s accounts of social practices. If his descriptions remain always incomplete, open-ended, hesitant, if they begin midway and stop for no special reason, this is not a weakness on his part but the result of his extreme attention to the vagaries of experience.[^340] To learn a tune, to coordinate a band, you need to fathom a large number of unlearned, uncoordinated fragments of action. This is also the reason, to take a different school of thought, why The´venot has to multiply the different regimes of action so as to simply begin to cover the simplest behavior. As soon as a non-formal description of formalism has to be given, every thinker becomes another Zeno, multiplying the intermediary steps ad infinitum. It’s also why Law, when trying to define his ANT perspective, insists that ‘the alternative metaphysics assumes out-thereness to be overwhelming, excessive, energetic, a set of undecided potentialities, and an ultimately undecidable flux’.[^341]

But it is Tarde, not surprisingly, who offered the most radical insights about the background necessary for every activity to emerge.[^342]

This is the consequence of his interpretation of the links between the big and the small that I have already used in the previous chapters. The big (states, organizations, markets) is an amplification but also a simplification of the small. Only Tarde could reverse common sense that much in quietly stating that: ‘So, too, there is generally more logic in a phrase than in a discourse, and more in a single discourse than in a succession or group of discourses; there is more in one special rite than in a whole religion, in one point of law than in a whole legal code, in one particular scientific theory than in the whole body of science; and there is more in a single piece of work executed by one workman than in the sum total of his performances.’[^343] With this principle we should not consider that the macro encompasses the micro, but that the micro is made of a proliferation of incommensurable entities—what he calls ‘monads’—which are simply lending one of their aspects, a ‘fac¸ade of themselves’, to make up a provisional whole. The small holds the big. Or rather the big could at any moment drown again in the small from which it emerged and to which it will return. Whatever the expression, it seems that no understanding of the social can be provided if you don’t turn your attention to another range of unformatted phenomena. It’s as if at some point you had to leave the solid land and go to sea.[^344]

I call this background plasma, namely that which is not yet formatted, not yet measured, not yet socialized, not yet engaged in metrological chains, and not yet covered, surveyed, mobilized, or subjectified.[^345] How big is it? Take a map of London and imagine that the social world visited so far occupies no more room than the subway. The plasma would be the rest of London, all its buildings, inhabitants, climates, plants, cats, palaces, horse guards. Yes, Garfinkel is right, ‘it’s astronomically massive in size and range’.

Once we recognize the extent of this plasma, we may relocate to the right place the two opposite intuitions of positivist and interpretative sociologies: yes, we have to turn our attention to the outside to make sense of any course of action; and yes, there is an indefinite flexibility in the interpretations of those courses. But the outside is not made of social stuff—just the opposite—and interpretation is not a characteristic of individualized human agents—just the opposite.

To interpret some behavior we have to add something, but this does not mean that we have to look for a social framework. Of course, sociologists were right to look for some ‘outside’, except this one does not resemble at all what they expected since it is entirely devoid of any trace of calibrated social inhabitant. They were right to look for ‘something hidden behind’, but it’s neither behind nor especially hidden. It’s in between and not made of social stuff. It is not hidden, simply unknown. It resembles a vast hinterland providing the resources for every single course of action to be fulfilled, much like the countryside for an urban dweller, much like the missing masses for a cosmologist trying to balance out the weight of the universe.

To interpret some behavior we have indeed to be prepared for many different versions, but this doesn’t mean that we have to turn to local interactions. At many points in this book I have criticized phenomenologists, and perhaps also humanists, for believing that face-to-face interactions, individual agents, and purposeful persons provided a more realist and lively locus than what they called the vain abstractions of society. Although they were right in insisting on uncertainties, they have misplaced their sources. It’s not that purposeful humans, intentional persons, and individual souls are the only interpretative agents in a world of matters of fact devoid of any meaning by itself.

What is meant by interpretations, flexibility, and fluidity is simply a way to register the vast outside to which every course of action has to appeal in order to be carried out. This is not true for just human actions, but for every activity. Hermeneutics is not a privilege of humans but, so to speak, a property of the world itself. The world is not a solid continent of facts sprinkled by a few lakes of uncertainties, but a vast ocean of uncertainties speckled by a few islands of calibrated and stabilized forms.

Do we really know that little? We know even less. Paradoxically, this ‘astronomical’ ignorance explains a lot of things. Why do fierce armies disappear in a week? Why do whole empires like the Soviet one vanish in a few months? Why do companies who cover the world go bankrupt after their next quarterly report? Why do the same companies, in less than two semesters, jump from being deep in the red to showing a massive profit? Why is it that quiet citizens turn into revolutionary crowds or that grim mass rallies break down into a joyous crowd of free citizens? Why is it that some dull individual is suddenly moved into action by an obscure piece of news? Why is it that such a stale academic musician is suddenly seized by the most daring rhythms? Generals, editorialists, managers, observers, moralists often say that those sudden changes have a soft impalpable liquid quality about them. That’s exactly the etymology of plasma.[^346] This does not mean that the solid architecture of society is crumbling behind, that the Great Leviathan has feet of clay, but that society and the Leviathan circulate inside such narrow canals that in order to be activated they have to rely on an unaccounted number of ingredients coming from the plasma around them. So far I have insisted too much on continuity, which is achieved through traceable connections that have always to be considered against a much vaster backdrop of discontinuities. Or to put it another way, a sociology has to emerge whose contradictory intuitions have to be maintained: it is hard and soft at the same time. We have to be able to consider both the formidable inertia of social structures and the incredible fluidity that maintains their existence: the latter is the real milieu that allows the former to circulate.

To every action I have described so far, you have to add an immense repertoire of missing masses. They are needed to balance the accounts, but they are missing. The good news is that social paraphernalia do not occupy much space; the bad news is that we don’t know much about this outside. And yet there exists a reserve, a reserve army, an immense territory—except it’s neither a territory nor an army—for every formatted, localized, continuous, accountable action to be carried out in.

It might be understood now why I have been so obstinate in criticizing the social of sociologists because it was a package not easily opened for inspection. If I have insisted a lot on not confusing the social as society with the social as association, it was to be able in the end to mobilize this reserve. How could any political action be possible if it couldn’t draw on the potentials lying in wait?

The laws of the social world may exist, but they occupy a very different position from what the tradition had first thought. They are not behind the scene, above our heads and before the action, but after the action, below the participants and smack in the foreground. They don’t cover, nor encompass, nor gather, nor explain; they circulate, they format, they standardize, they coordinate, they have to be explained. There is no society, or rather, society is not the name of the whole terrain. Thus we may start all over again and begin exploring the vast landscape where the social sciences have so far only established a few tiny bridgeheads. For sociology the era of exploration may start again, provided we keep reminding ourselves of this motto: don’t fill in the blanks. Why should we be impatient with this discipline? Sociology is a new science that was born last in a large family of many older brothers and sisters. It’s comprehensible that it tried at first to emulate their successes by imitating their definition of science and of the social. It takes time to discover one’s own way.

---

[^302]: This is the central argument about image flaws and image flows in Latour and Weibel, Iconoclash. More can be seen on this 1996 election example in Latour and Hermant, Paris the Invisible City.

[^303]: See Latour and Weibel, Making Things Public; Heurtin; L’espac public.

[^304]: Let us remember that any site will be taken as an actor network if it is the source of what acts at a distance on other sites—hence giving it a star-like shape—and is the end point of all the transactions leading to it—hence giving it the same star-like shape. So the word ‘site’ should not be taken as a synonym of the local that we have abandoned in the previous chapter.

[^305]: I introduced the expression of inscription devices in Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar (1986), Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts.

[^306]: French speakers have the great advantage of still hearing in their word forme the same etymology as in their beloved fromages, cheese being literally fermented milk that is put into a forme or a fourme. Gastronomy and epistemology are close enough for them!

[^307]: There is a rich literature on the ‘matter of form’, including Jacques Derrida (1998), Of Grammatology; Franc¸ois Dagognet (1974), Ecriture et iconographie; Elizabeth Eisenstein (1979), The Printing Press as an Agent of Change; and Goody, The Domestication of the Savage Mind. For recent work on formalism see Eric Livingston (1985), The Ethnomethodological Foundations of Mathematical Practice; MacKenzie, Mechanizing Proof; He´le`ne Mialet (2003), ‘Reading Hawking’s Presence: An Interview with a Self-Effacing Man’; Rosental, La Trame de l’e´vidence; Bryan Rotman (1993), Ad Infinitum: The Ghost in Turing Machine. Taking God out of Mathematics and Putting the Body Back In; and Andrew Warwick (2003), Masters of Theory: Cambridge and the Rise of Mathematical Physics. Derrida has never stopped meditating on the odd sort of materiality implied by archives—see Derrida (1995), Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression.

[^308]: An expression I introduced in Latour, Science In Action to describe not displacement without transformation but displacement through transformations. See also the seminal paper by The´venot, ‘Rules and implements: investment in forms’ that links standardization, economization, and formatting together.

[^309]: Susan Leigh Star and Jim Griesemer (1989), ‘Institutional Ecology, ‘‘Translations’’ and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907–1939’.

[^310]: Harry Collins (1990), Artificial Experts: Social Knowledge and Intelligent Machines and MacKenzie, Mechanizing Proof provide many powerful examples of the richness of a redescription of formalism as does Galison, Image and Logic.

[^311]: See Alain Desrosie`res (2002), The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reasoning; Theodore M. Porter (1995), Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public Life; and Norton Wise (1995), The Values of Precision and Exactitude.

[^312]: This is why there is no reason to deplore the empire of what Garfinkel designates, somewhat derogatively, by FA, that is, ‘Formal Analysis’ of the ‘worldwide social movement’. ‘Thinking like a sociologist involves a commitment to the belief that there is no orderliness in the concreteness of everyday life.’ Garfinkel, Ethnomethodology’s Program, p.136.

[^313]: This is a restatement of the principle of irreduction as defined in Latour Irreductions.

[^314]: A telling example is provided in Bowker and Star, Sorting Things Out. It would be a case of ‘misplaced concreteness’ to criticize those formatting as being ‘abstract’. This is the limit of Lave Cognition in Practice, which otherwise shows a welcomed attention to the practice.

[^315]: When we deal later with plasma, we will once again reconsider the great advantage of Garfinkel’s position and understand why it has most likely been misdirected due to his attachment to phenomenology.

[^316]: There is now a rich literature on the practical extension of networks through standards. See Ken Alder (1995), ‘A Revolution to Measure: The Political economy of the Metric System in France’; Rexmond Canning Cochrane (1976), Measures for Progress: A History of National Bureau of Standards; Alexandre Mallard (1996), ‘Les instruments dans la coordination de l’action: pratique technique, me´trologie, instrument scientifique’; Me´lard ‘L’autorite´ des instruments’; and Joseph O’Connell (1993), ‘Metrology: the Creation of Universality by the Circulation of Particulars’. The most decisive work has been done in Simon Schaffer (1988), ‘Astronomers Mark Time: Discipline And The Personal Equation’ and (1991b), ‘A Manufactory of OHMS, Victorian Metrology and its Instrumentation’.

[^317]: A stunning example of the use of metrology in the arm’s race debate has been provided by Don MacKenzie (1990), Inventing Accuracy: A Historical Sociology of Nuclear Missile Guidance. See also Galison, Einstein’s Clocks.

[^318]: Consider the standards of the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), a private firm based in London to which the European Union has delegated some of the work. Many powerful examples of the way ‘micro’ techniques of accounting hold the ‘macro’ consequences of profit and economical theories can be found in the journal Accounting, Organizations and Society. See also Tomo Susuki (2003), ‘The epistemology of macroeconomic reality: The Keynesian Revolution from an accounting point of view’.

[^319]: See Alexandra Minvielle (forthcoming), ‘De quoi une enterprise est-elle capable?’. On all those questions of ‘spreading’ in time and space by ‘making’ space and time, see the special issue of Organizations and especially G. Jones, C. McLean and Paolo Quattrone (2004), ‘Spacing and Timing’: Introduction to the Special Issue of Organization on ‘Spacing and Timing’.

[^320]: Stuart A. Kirk and Herb Kutchins (1992), The Selling of DSM: The Rhetoric of Science in Psychiatry.

[^321]: It does not require some heroic feat of reflexivity to apply this principle to Tarde’s sociology and to ANT itself. No privileged position is required to make this point, nor any absolute frame of reference.

[^322]: In addition to Alain Boureau (1992), ‘L’adage Vox Populi, Vox Dei et l’invention de la nation anglaise (VIIIe-XIIe sie`cle)’, a modern day example is provided by the word ‘environnement’ in Florian Charvolin (2003), L’invention de l’environnement en France. Chroniques anthropologiques d’une institutionnalisation. For a general theory of macroactors, see Cooren, The Organizing Property of Communication. In a different vein, JeanPierre Faye (1972), Langages totalitaires offers another way to take seriously the connecting power of specific statements. For the use of socio-linguistics tools, see Lorenza Mondada (2000), De´crire la ville: La construction des savoirs urbains dans l’interaction et dans le texte.

[^323]: In his work on the expression ‘precautionary principle’ in European offices, see Jim Dratwa (2003), ‘Taking Risks with the Precautionary Principle’.

[^324]: A beautiful example of the connecting ability of arguments is provided in Michael Baxandall (1985), Patterns of Intention. On The Historical Explanation Of Pictures. Timothy Mitchell (2002), Rule of Experts: Egypt, Techno-Politics, Modernity provides one of the best cases of the richness of studying in addition to the collecting statement ‘development’ the formatting power of intellectual technologies.

    325Boltanski and The´venot, On Justification. Boltanski’s sociology is half Kantian philosophy and half a new attention toward collecting and circulating statements. There should be no difficulty in relocating the second and getting rid of the first.

[^326]: See Cochrane, Measures for Progress. Unfortunately, the amazing article by P. Hunter (1980), ‘The National System of Scientific Measurement’, to my knowledge, has not been updated.

[^327]: That belief is a modernist institution coming from critique is one of the important aspects of the study of iconoclasm and of the whole repertoire of critical gestures. See Latour and Weibel, Iconoclash.

[^328]: Claverie, Les Guerres de la Vierge.

[^329]: I have already shown in Part I what it did to the study of science.

[^330]: I am following here Antoine Hennion (1993), La passion musicale: Une sociologie de la me´diation.

[^331]: See Antoine Hennion and Genevie`ve Teil (2003), ‘Le gouˆt du vin: Pour une sociologie de l’attention’ and Joseph Leo Koerner (2004), The Reformation of the Image.

[^332]: The treatment of masterpieces by some art historians, see Svetlana Alpers (1988), Rembrandt’s Enterprise: The Studio and the Market, is an excellent model for treating the rest of the social, even for those who like Francis Haskell (1982), Patrons and Painters: A Study in the Relations Between Italian Art and Society in the Age of the Baroque don’t indulge in any explicit social theory whatsoever.

[^333]: Neologism in Yaneva, ‘L’affluence des objets’.

[^334]: This is also the place where I have to part company finally with Tarde, who never thought it necessary to differentiate the types of threads with which he was weaving his definition of the social world. In this sense, Tarde maintained a substantive and not a relativist definition of sociology.

[^335]: It’s possible that such a move is beyond the reach of social science and that it leads to philosophy. But I have learned from Mol that ‘empirical philosophy’ might be another way to do social science.

[^336]: If I was accused of positivism in rejecting every hidden force (see the second source of uncertainty, p. 43), I hope it’s now clear that it was only a momentary impression.

[^337]: This is what renders so interesting a philosophy such as that of Etienne Souriau (1943), Les diffe´rents modes d’existence. To define and explore them is my next project, which I call an inquiry into regimes of enunciation.

[^338]: Luhmann’s masterly attempt at respecting the differences through the notion of autonomous spheres was unfortunately wasted because he insisted in describing all the spheres through the common meta-language borrowed from a simplified version of biology.

[^339]: Garfinkel, Ethnomethodology’s Program, p. 104.

[^340]: See Howard Becker (1991), Outsiders: studies in the sociology of deviance and Becker, Art Worlds.

[^341]: Law, After Method, p. 144.

[^342]: Tarde, Psychologie e´conomique, p. 220.

[^343]: Tarde, Social Laws, p. 76.

[^344]: Sloterdijk with his philosophy of explicitation of the envelopes in which we are all folded—although very different from the metaphorical circulation of network—offers a powerful new description of what is always missing from any account.

[^345]: See Emmanuel Didier (2001), ‘De l’e´chantillon a` la population: Sociologie de la ge´ne´ralisation par sondage aux Etats-Unis’ for a remarkable example of plasma before it has been turned into numbers.

[^346]: See the index in Cassin, L’effet sophistique.
